APPENDIX 2 
A GAZETTEER OF EARLY ISLAMIC THUGHŪR AND ‘AWĀṢIM SITES 
 The following section is a gazetteer of all major, historically-known thughūr 
frontier sites. The sites are presented alphabetically in four sections: 1) location, 
environmental context, and routes; 2) history from primary and secondary sources;1 3) 
standing remains and archaeological work done at the site; and 4) personal 
observations.2
 The textual information related to building or destruction, raids, local 
leaders, etc., for each site has become pervasive in secondary sources related to the 
thughūr and Early Islamic history and very little of it has ever been called into 
question. Nevertheless, the goal is neither to provide every historical detail nor 
analyze the historiographic veracity of the textual evidence here. While such a study is 
certainly necessary, its presence here is a separate effort entirely and one which would 
outweigh the dissertation itself not only in new data, but in sheer volume. Rather, this 
section presents archaeology to amplify all of the pieces of material relevant to each 
site in total as a historical summary of events. In particular, the gazetteer contributes to 
 
to Middle Islamic period with Ottoman period traveler’s notes. Years and centuries are in C.E. unless 
otherwise noted. 
 2
 Visits to the sites were made in the summers of 2002–2006. Sites that were not visited were those 
in the thughūr al-bakriya (Shimshāṭ, Ḥiṣn Ziyād, Kamkh, and Ḥiṣn Qalawdhiya) and those in Syria of 
the‘awāṣim (Tīzīn, Dābiq, Qūrus, Jūma, and Manbij/Jisr Manbij). 

the historical geography of certain thughūr sites that have remained elusive, 
identifying the sites of Ḥadath and Hārūnīyya and discussing the location of Mar‘ash. 
Adhana 
Seleucid: Antioch on the Sarus; Classical: Hadriana, Severiana, Adana; Modern: 
Adana 
Location 
 The modern sprawling city of Adana covers an isolated circular hill rising out of 
the plain a few miles from the foothills of the Taurus. The Sayhān River (classical 
Sarus/Sinarus/Psarus of Xenophon and Saron of Stephanus) flows at the base of the 
hill on the eastern side. The Sayhān, like the Jayhān River, has changed courses 
frequently during its history. The Sayhān was navigable until Justinian’s day and 
earlier was united with the Jayhān. Strabo noticed a great marsh stretching from the 
delta of the Jayhān to the Sayhān. 
 In the nineteenth century, travelers remarked on the many date trees and vineyards 
around Adhana and the castor-oil plant, native to the region. Ainsworth upon his visit 
noted that, “The fact is, that it is a large and populous place, and wherever that is the 
case, there are evil-disposed people.”3
 In the city, Langlois noted a mixed population 
of Turks, Arabs, Armenians, Greeks, and Syrian Jacobites numbering 22,500 around 
 

the mid nineteenth century.4
 Childs, in the early twentieth century, noted a population 
of 100,000.5
 It is twenty miles or one journey’s stop to Maṣṣīṣa. 
History6
 The original Seleucid foundation was named Antioch on the Sarus. In the second 
century C.E., it became part of the province of Cilicia I and underwent a series of 
names following those emperors that traveled through it, such as Hadriana after 
Hadrian and Severiana after Severus in 194 C.E. In the Byzantine period, Justinian 
was attributed with the building of the infamous bridge that spans across the Sayhān 
River in the center of the city in a single arch. The latest bishop was known in Adana 
until ca. 681 with no further bishops until the twelfth century. Haldon and Kennedy 
remark that Adhana in the Early Islamic period was settled in a similar process as 
Maṣṣīṣa although it was not as major as Maṣṣīṣa or Ṭarsūs. The first Late Umayyad 
encampment was located on the west bank of the Sayhān River. Al-Walīd in 743 and 
Manṣūr in 758 made repairs to the city. It is generally accepted that Adhana was 
settled by a garrison of Khurāsānīs in an encampment built in 758/59. According to 
Bonner’s analysis of Khalifa’s text this may have been in 761/62 by Maslama b. 
Yahya under the direction of Ṣāliḥ b. ‘
Alī.
7
 This last version suggests a Syrian 
 
 5
 Childs, Across Asia Minor. 
Frontier,” 107–08; Fr. Taeschner, “Adana,” EI2; F. Hild and H. Hellenkemper, Kilikien und Isaurien
(Wien: Verlag der Österreichischen Akademie der Wissenschaften, 1990), 154-8.
 7
 Bonner, Aristocratic Violence and Holy War, 56–61. 

encampment with a Syrian commander may have been founded beside with the 
Khurāsānī encampment. Abu Ezzah interpolates that in 758/59 Khurāsānī troops at 
Adhana garrisoned together with Arab troops from Syria of Bajīla and Bāhila clans.8
There was a settlement on the east side of the river constructed during the reign of al-Manṣūr under the direction of Ṣāliḥ b. ‘
Alī. The settlement resembled a suburb of the 
town and was demolished and reconstructed by Hārūn al-Rashīd during the reign of al-Mahdī. In 781/82 Hārūn al-Rashīd settled peoples from Dimashq and al-Urdunn in 
Adhana. Hārūn fortified it in 787/88, but the date is uncertain. Ya‘
qūbī, via Ibn 
Shaddād stated that the fortifications were not finished during Hārūn’s reign but 
during his son’s, al-Amīn, and so between 808 and 810 it was refortified with more 
settlers. A Turkish eunuch of Hārūn’s most likely administered the work on the town 
in 805–806, according to Yāqūt, who was then killed in 809–810 during the reign of 
al-Amīn. In 879, the Byzantines sacked Adhana and killed 1,400 men and took 400 
prisoners. By the tenth century, travelers remarked that it was fairly populated and 
prosperous.
 Research 
 Very little archaeological research in Adhana has been done or is known about the 
city. Edwards noted that there were no traces of medieval walls.9
 Sinclair did not 
include Adhana in his survey of eastern Turkey because it was too far west. Seton-Williams in her Cilician Survey recorded a site within the city, designated as Site 10: 
 
 9
 Edwards, Fortifications, n. 10. 

Adana Tepebağ.
quarter near the Museum. Bay Ali Riza Yalgin, director of the museum, dug a 
sounding about 4 m deep, where he revealed Hellenistic, Roman, and Islamic remains. 
This is most likely part of the first settlement on the west bank. Ainsworth did note 
some features of the city.11 He measured the bridge over the Sayhān as 325 feet long, 
which Langlois noted had an inscription attributing its construction to Auxentius. 
Childs mentions the “Arab bridge” that in his time had irregular arches and massive 
piers.12 On the east bank of the river near the bridge were the remains of fortification 
walls. This is possibly the fortress of Manṣūr built in the ‘Abbāsid period although 
Langlois considered this Byzantine. In addition Langlois noted three medieval 
mosques: the Eski Jami (previously an old Christian church dedicated to St. James), 
the Oğlu Jami, and Piri Pasha. He also noted a ruined castle and the “great mosque” as 
the only remains of note in the older city. The castle is presumably what he calls the 
castle of Hārūn al-Rashid on the east bank of the river to the right proceeding east 
from the city. 
Personal Observations, 7/20/05 
 As Adana is the fourth largest city in Turkey, it is rather difficult to locate anything 
of antiquity, aside from the Roman bridge. Walking around just on the east side of the 
river revealed a sprawling poorer quarter of the city but no traces of a ruined castle or 
“great mosque.” It is possible remnants of these are there but in rather difficult to find 
 

places, abutting houses, within buildings, parts of foundations, etc., I did not go to the 
salvage excavations conducted in the Tepebağ quarter, but the area is quite close to the 
river and mounded on a natural rise. The two locations of settlement for Adhana — on 
the west bank in the Tepebağ hill and on the east bank along the river as the most 
probable locations, following the historical evidence — suggests two encampments 
(the Syrian and Khurāsānī), or a fortress and a town. The Adana museum has a horde 
of ‘Abbāsid silver dirhams but I could not find a provenance for them. 
Coordinates: 36N N 4095901 E 708016 
Anṭākiya 
(see Chapter 2) 
Coordinates: 37N N 4010217 E 244752 
‘Awlās/Ḥiṣn ‘Awlās 
(see Chapter 4) 
Coordinates: 36N N 4035867 E 602767 
‘Ayn Zarba 
Classical Anazarbos or Anabarza; Arabic Nāwarzā, ‘
Ayn Zarba; Armenian Anavarz, 
Anawarza, Anarzaba, Anarzap; Modern Anavarza (Dilekayya) 
Location 
 ‘Ayn Zarba is located at the foot a large limestone outcropping that stands isolated 
in the central eastern part of the Cilician Plain. The later castle was built on top of this 
feature, two hundred m in altitude and 4.5 km in length. The western face of the 

outcrop drops in a nearly vertical cliff while the eastern end slopes gradually down to 
the valley floor. North of the city wall along the western face is a large cave. Nearby 
on the eastern side is the Sombaz Çay that empties into the Jayhān River. Water was 
supplied to ‘Ayn Zarba from aqueducts. One came from the Sombaz Çay and another 
from Hamamköyü, both going north. Ainsworth notes these and stated that the former 
from the west traveled five to six miles while the latter from the north traveled fifteen 
miles. Wells also provided access to water when the aqueducts ceased to function. The 
site is located just north of a large bend of this river and between the sites of Sīs 
(southwest of it, one day’s march, about twenty-four miles apart) and Tall Hamdun, 
the latter located on the other side of the Jayhān. As a result, its location is both 
strategic and secure, guarding the north–south routes toward the frontier that 
functioned since the Roman period (and earlier) as one of the two main trade routes 
linking Syria and Cappadocia. Today, the site is situated adjacent to the village of 
Dilekayya/Anavarza that has expanded within the ancient site. 1.5 km south is the 
village of Çeçen, inhabited by Circassians. Akdam, 2 km west of Çeçen, is populated 
by Armenians and relocated Turks from Macedonia. Turkmen in the Cilician Plain 
during the winter move to their yaylas in the Taurus uplands in summer for 
pastoralism, grazing, and refuge from heat, passing through the site in late spring. The 
people of Anavarza go to the area of Saimbeyli in the Taurus, beyond Kozan and 
Feke. Agriculture in the plain consists of wheat, barley, oats, and sesame and in the 
Anavarza area, rice and cotton. Ramsay, describing the road systems, lists it from the 
Peutinger Table on the route from Kokussos to eastern Cilicia following the route of 

Cocuso–Laranda–Badimo–Praetorio–Flaviada–Anazarbo, which translates in modern 
geography to: Goksun–Adji Alma Plateau–Kara Kilisa Ruin, Saros River Gorge– 
Hancha Dere-Hadjin near Badimon-Gok Su (Saros)–Kiraz Bel–Tapandere near 
Praetorium–Girgen Su–Kozan–Dilekayya. Today, from Adana one can proceed along 
the modern highway and exit toward Ceyhan, then follow the Ceyhan road northward 
past Mercimek and Çatalhöyüğü to Ayşehoca where one makes a right and proceeds 
east 4 km toward Dilekkaya. From the north one travels south from the Taurus 
Mountains past Saimbeyli, Feke, and Kozan. At Kozan, the left fork will pass through 
Hacıbeyli until Ayşehoca where one turns left toward Dilekkaya. 
History13
 Anavarza was a Seleucid town that then fell under the Tarcondimotid Dynasty. By 
the second century C.E., particularly under the reign of Vespasian, it prospered and it 
was known primarily for its flax/linen and viticulture industries. At some point the city 
was called Caesarea before Octavian visited Cilicia in 19 C.E. on his way to Syria. 
Later it was known as Caesarea ad Anazarbus or Anazarbus. In the third century C.E., 
it rivaled Tarsus in size and administrative function as a metropolis. In 260 C.E., the 
city and the region of Cilicia were invaded by the Persians under Shapur. It had the 
standard embellishments of the classical city including two theatres (one hewn from 
the rock which functioned as an acropolis and amphitheatre) and a stadium, as well as 
 
M. Canard, “‘Ayn Zarba” EI2; M. Canard, “La Prise d’Heraclée et les Relations entre Harun ar-Rashid 
et l’empereur Nicéphore 1er,” Byzantion 32 (1962), 372ff; M. Canard, Histoire de la dynastie des 
H’amdanides de Jazira et de Syrie (Paris, 1953), i.806–08; H. Hellenkemper, “Die Stadtmauern von 
Anazarbos/‘Ayn Zarba,” Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenlandischen Gesellschaft 7 (1990): 71–76; 
Vasiliev, Byzance et les Arabes, I. 126, 224; Wheatley, The Places, 120; Le Strange, Lands, 129; Le 
Strange, Palestine, 387; Hild and Hellenkemper, Kilikien und Isaurien, 178-185. 

two colonnaded streets. It was also a mint from at least 1 B.C.E. to 3 C.E. and known 
for its guild of linen workers. At the end of the fourth century C.E., a group 
comprising the Tzannoi (a Black Sea tribe), Huns, and Balbinas the Isaurian burned 
Anazarbus along with Irenopolis and Castabala Hierapolis. From 408–450, it attained 
the status of a metropolis of Cilicia Secunda (II) under Theodosius. In the sixth 
century the city was rebuilt twice and renamed Justinopolis and Justinianopolis after 
two earthquakes in 525 and 561, respectively. The metropolitan of the city in 550 was 
a figure named John who was associated with several important meetings with bishops 
ordered by the Emperor Justinian. The town had bishops from the fourth through the 
twelfth centuries, excluding a gap, apparently, between circa 557–680. 
 ‘Ayn Zarba was abandoned or dramatically reduced in the Umayyad period. ‘Ayn 
Zarba is one of the three ‘Abbāsid frontier forts that were first constructed under the 
reign of Hārūn al-Rashīd. Although Arabic sources imply that the city was newly 
built, in actuality, Hārūn only repaired the circuit wall and citadel in 796, and the city 
was garrisoned with Khurāsānī troops under the direction of Abū Sulaym, his eunuch. 
Abū Sulaym enticed Khurāsānīs (and others) to settle (manāzil) with the incentive of 
houses as iqtạ‘. Its walls were noted as quite fine and its setting was likened to the 
Ghaur or Jordanian lowlands, described as a plain surrounded by palm trees, and 
prosperous fertile and arable lands, with many fruit trees, cereal fields, and grazing 
lands. During this time it was considered part of Maṣṣị̄ṣa’s territory. Abu Sulayman al-Turkī al-Khādim, governor of the thughūr under Hārūn, further fortified it in 804. This 
was most likely following a large scale Byzantine raid in 804. Another invasion 

occurred in 806. ‘Abdullā b. Ṭāhir, governor of the region, resettled Egyptians to the 
frontier fort in 827. Al-Mu‘
taṣim settled Zuṭṭ populations from the swamps of southern 
Iraq (al-baṭā’ih)̣ who were attacked by a Byzantine raid occurring in the same year 
835. In 861, al-Mutawakkil repaired the circuit wall following a fourth Byzantine raid 
in 855. This is hypothesized from a Kufic inscription, rather than by sources. In this 
last raid, the Byzantines relocated many Zuṭṭ to Constantinople along with their 
families and buffaloes. Following a Byzantine raid in 899, many leaders in the thughūr 
were vying for power. Al-Mu‘taḍid personally visited ‘Ayn Zarba and other sites to 
resolve the issue. 
 During the Byzantine reconquest, the Byzantine armies under Nicephorus Phocas 
advanced on ‘Ayn Zarba with 90,000 troops and 160,000 men against the Muslims 
who numbered 1,000 or 4,000. They apparently destroyed the town in 961, 962, or 
964. The Ḥamdānid ruler Sayf al-Dawla rebuilt the city in 955–956 at a cost of three 
million dirhams. It fell into Byzantine hands again in 962. Part of the population 
consisted of relocated Armenians. In the tenth and eleventh centuries, it was described 
as a populous and prosperous city surrounded by productive villages. During the 
Middle Islamic period, the Saljūqs then the Crusaders captured the site and destroyed 
it and annexed it within the province of Little Armenia. The Armenian population 
remained and ‘Ayn Zarba was chosen as a new capital in 1100 by the Armenian Toros 
I. At this point the site was concentrated in the upland fortified castle while the lower 
town went out of use. Final destruction by the Mamlūks in 1374–1375 spelled ruin for 
the site. 

Research 
 The first investigations to ‘Ayn Zarba were from the early travelers such as Texier, 
Ainsworth, Barker, Langlois, Bell, Wilhelm and Keil, and King.14 At ‘Ayn Zarba, 
several buildings are still standing and well preserved. These date, primarly, from the 
classical settlement of the site. Ainsworth noted a church and dated it to the sixth or 
seventh century, although which church is uncertain. In the southwest corner of the 
site, there is a church built in a cruciform style with a mosaic floor. At the intersection 
of the main streets were another church and a bath. The church was in a basilica style 
and dedicated by inscription on the exterior of the apse to the Apostles of Christ. 
Gough and his wife were the first to extensively survey the site in 1949 for six months, 
then in 1950 for ten weeks and briefly in 1951.15 They noted that the southern gate 
was the most massive, 4.70 m wide and flanked by towers 6.50 x 7.00 deep. This was 
not a triumphal arch as Gough, indicated but a monumental entrance and the main 
entrance with a cardo street running west from it. The street, still visible with columns 
alongside, must have been in use throughout the history of the site. While the 
accumulation has raised the surface level of the plain, the flagstones of the street were 
still visible. Later surveys paid little attention to ‘Ayn Zarba. Seton-Williams in her 
 
V (1838) [first traveler to site]; C. Texier, Asie Mineure, description géographique, historique et 
archéologique (Paris, 1862); Ainsworth, A Personal Narrative of the Euphrates Expedition, I.121, 169, 
174; W. Barker, The Birthland of St. Paul. Cilicia: Its Former History and Present State, edited by W. 
Ainsworth (London, 1855), 54–56, 275, 283; V. Langlois, Voyage dans la Cilicie et dans les 
Montagnes du Taurus, exécuté pendant les années 1852–1853 (Paris, 1861), 434; Heberdey, R. and A. 
Wilhelm, “Reisen in Kilikien,” Denkschriften der kaiserlichen Akademie der Wissenschaften in Wien, 
Philosophisch-historische Classe 44.6 (1896): 34–38; E. King, “A Journey through Armenian Cilicia,” 
Asian Affairs 24 (1937): 234–36 (Journal of the Royal Central Asian Society 24). 

Cilician Survey only alluded to Gough’s work.16 Sinclair, although noting its location 
within Cilicia, did not describe the site as it was too far out of his boundaries.17 Brief 
excavation in 1972 by the Turkish archaeologist Taşyürek in the village of Dilekayya 
uncovered a necropolis from the Roman period.18
 Edwards in his survey of Armenian fortifications discussed the site extensively and 
noted the presence of Islamic remains primarily as reused stones rebuilding the 
original city walls. Edwards discerned five periods of construction from different 
types of masonry and identified the Islamic elements of the city based on these 
construction styles and inscriptions. His main work centered on the southern entrance 
wall. Unlike the northern wall, the south wall consisted of four horseshoe shaped 
bastions (B, C, D) and a single square tower (A). He stated that Byzantine 
construction included a collapsed arch of the original entrance, due north of tower B.19
It was built with an opus listatum style, consisting of four layers of brick tiles 
sandwiched between a single course of rough cut ashlar. Beds of mortar were uneven 
with much rock fragment. Most of the circuit wall east of the entrance had this 
Byzantine masonry — dated vaguely either from sixth century repairs or tenth century 
repairs. It is perplexing and unclear why (and how) Edwards necessarily dated this 
 
Excavations and Survey, 1973” Anatolian Studies 24 (1974), 26; O. A. Taşyürek, “1973 yılı Kilikya 
Araştırma,” 117; See also M. Altay, “Anavarza Mozayiklari Hakkinda On Rapor (I–II)” Turk Arkeoloji 
Dergisi 15.2 (1966): 49–54; N. Sevgen, Anadolu Kaleleri (Ankara, 1959), 62–64. 

construction as Byzantine and not more specifically as Late Roman sixth century or 
Middle Byzantine mid-tenth century construction. The Islamic phase, according to 
Edwards, occurred at tower A, the square flanking towers of B, and the circuit 
between A and B.20 The style of the masonry consisted of extremely smooth recycled 
blocks of ashlar placed in irregular courses. Foundation of the circuit east of A and 
lower thirty percent of square bastions flanking B had small crude stones forming a 
socle. The city circuit wall below had similar recycled ashlar square towers and a 
fragments of a dedicatory inscription in Kufic with the name of al-Mutawakkil (846–
861).21 The Islamic wall extended slightly south of its original line. Tower B still 
functioned as the entrance and bastions flanked the gate. The castle on the outcrop 
comprises several phases. It was called the Kouinda by Schlumberger and measured 5 
km long, 200–300 m high, and 15 m wide. While nothing earlier than Byzantine was 
detected architecturally it is likely that it served once as the acropolis of the city. The 
well-fortified castle consisted of two enclosures. In the first enclosure, the entrance 
was at the west end of the south wall accessed by rock cut steps from the plain near 
the theater. According to Edwards, the entrance was of Armenian or (presumably 
Middle) Byzantine construction. East of the gate and adjoining it is a small stretch of 
wall with a hollow square tower, possibly Islamic with similar masonry to lower city 
main gate.22 The east wall was ascertained as Byzantine. The second enclosure was 
 
Kleinarmenien, Geographica Historica 1 (Bonn, 1976), 196.

mainly Byzantine. In the southwest corner was a different construction style that was 
not Byzantine or Armenian, but possibly Islamic built over a Byzantine phase. South 
of the castle lower on the outcropping was a large Byzantine church dated to 516 and 
cut into the rock. The shrine had frescoes and the head of Christ. 
Personal Observations, 8/3/04 
 My personal observations have greatly changed since my initial visit as I am now 
part of a predominantly Austrian team working on the site led by R. Posamentir from 
the DAI in Istanbul. To date we have conducted a topographic survey, architectural 
survey, and a geomagnetic survey, collecting pottery from various areas. The entire 
site is essentially flat short scrub — the grazing area of sheep and goats. Several 
buildings rise in various levels of preservation throughout the site including two well-preserved tile baths. The one farthest to the north shows the amount of sediment that 
comes almost up to the doors. A local villager said digging at the site for houses’ 
foundations revealed four meters of sedimentation depth. The monumental arch (not a 
triumphal gateway) is in dangerous precarious disrepair. Houses have been built all 
around it and so searching for the Kufic inscription proved quite difficult and 
unsuccessful, as many of the stones have been removed. From the first visit, just 
glancing at the surface materials the Roman, Late Roman, Early Islamic, and Middle 
Islamic were fairly equal but limited to within the city walls and not located in 
extramural areas such as the hippodrome or castle. As such, the Early Islamic site 
seems to have been built within the large classical site, but future analysis of the 
collected transects of surface pottery may define it further. The standing architecture 

was either identifiably Roman or Late Roman/Byzantine. The high state of the 
preserved architecture occurred in both baths specifically suggesting they continued to 
be used, perhaps as pottery kilns. Preliminary evidence of ceramics shows an 
overwhelming amount of ‘Abbāsid pottery including many brittleware holemouth 
rims, but almost no seventh century brittleware diagnostics and very few Syrian 
yellow-glaze wares, perhaps supporting the evidence that the site was only resettled in 
the mid-eighth century. In my first visit in 2004, however, the local villager found a 
post-reform Umayyad coin while we were walking the site. Further, tenth and eleventh 
century glazed pieces in parts of the northern city wall mortar suggest a late date for at 
least those sections that were rebuilt prior or following the Byzantine reconquest. 
Coordinates: 36N N 412718 E 757076 
Baghrās 
(see Chapters 2 and 7) 
Coordinates: 37N N 4038328 E 254051 
Bālis
Classical Meskene, Barbalissos 
Location 
 Bālis is located in present-day northern Syria on the west bank of the Euphrates 
River at the point where the river turns southeast to flow down from modern Turkey 
through Syria into Iraq. It is roughly equidistant between Ḥalab and Raqqa and 42 km 
west of Qal‘at Ja‘bar. Today it sits along the dammed Asad Lake. Due to its location, 

it was sometimes included as part of Syria, the Jazīra, and part of the ‘awāṣim. It was 
considered the first stop when coming into Syria from Iraq. 
History23
 Bālis was the classical Barbalissos, and known in the Roman period as part of the 
province of Euphratensis, the Roman limes against the Persians. A large Roman force 
of 60,000 was defeated by the Persians in 252/53 C.E. under Shapur I. In 540 C.E., the 
Persians attacked the city once more under Khusraw leading Justinian to rebuild its 
walls, add a fortress, and fortify its surrounding villages. As a Christian site, the city’s 
importance derives from the fact that it was the place where S. Bacchus (usually 
commemorated together with S. Sergius) was executed and buried. Its bishops were 
under the See of Hierapolis (Manbij) and the Patriarchate of Antioch. 
 The city was conquered by treaty in 635 C.E. either by Abū ‘Ubayda or Ḥabīb b. 
Maslama. Balādhurī states that after the conquest of Dulūk and Ra‘bān, Abu ‘Ubayda 
advanced until he reached ‘Arājīn in the area of Bālis. He sent his ambassador and an 
army to negotiate the treaty with the city’s rulers, two Byzantine noblemen and 
brothers, that inhabitants could either pay the jizya or emigrate. Many chose the latter 
and went up the river to Manbij. Qays tribesmen were encouraged to settle in the city 
and a troop of soldiers and converted Arabs. Bālis and its dependent villages were 
non-irrigated lands subdued with tithe. Maslama b. ‘Abd al-Malik camped at Bālis 
during his campaigns against the Byzantines. Inhabitants of villages entreated him to 
build a canal from the Euphrates to irrigate their lands. He accepted in exchange for a 
 
Rouault and M. G. Masetti-Rouault (Milan, 1993), 234, 482–83; E. Herzfeld, “Bālis” EI1, 620–21. 

third of their harvest after the sultan took a tenth. He built the canal named Nahr 
Maslama and the inhabitants respected the conditions. His brother, Sa‘id b. ‘Abd al-Malik, built another, the Nahr Sa‘id. Maslama also restored the Justinianic city wall of 
the town and refortified it. It is likely that Sa‘id functioned as the city’s administrator 
since Maslama was governor of the entire frontier and led several important raids into 
Anatolia. 
 In the ‘Abbāsid period, Hārūn al-Rashīd placed Bālis in the ‘awāṣim. The Christian 
community continued as evidenced by an Episcopal conference hosted by the diocese 
of Bālis in 820 C.E. In 859 C.E., an earthquake damaged the city. Later in the same 
century, it became first an outpost of the Ṭūlūnids and then raided by an anti-Ṭūlūnid 
insurgent army in 882. The city remained an important trading hub and merchandise 
from Egypt would pass through Syria by boat from Bālis to Baghdād. It became a mint 
and headquarters for al-Mu‘taḍid in 900 for raids into Anatolia. 
 The city fell to the Byzantines in 966 who took 300 prisoners. Soon after, 
geographers noted that it was an ancient and small town (madīna saghira); once “the 
Port of Syria” but no longer a halting place or center for trade. Its double circuit walls 
were still standing and gardens and orchards were planted between the town and the 
Euphrates, along with wheat and barley cultivation and soap production. Interestingly, 
the formerly Sunni majority was replaced by Isma‘ili Shiites and commemorative 
shrines were built around the edges of the city. Jacobite bishops were known to have 
resided until the mid eleventh century C.E. The Crusaders took Bālis in 1110 under 
Tancred of Antioch and in 1140 it was briefly part of the principality of Edessa. Under 

the Zengids and Ayyubids, there was no construction of buildings and infrastructure 
from the mid-twelfth to mid-thirteenth century until the city was taken by the Mongols 
in 1259/60. 
Remains 
 In 1907, Sarre and Herzfeld visited the site and sketched it with the possibility of 
excavating the Islamic city.24 Between 1929 and 1931, the French under de Lorey, 
Salles, and later Cavro excavated the Ayyubid city focusing around the mosque and 
digging large parallel trenches through the city. In response to the impending Tabqa 
Dam, the French under Golvin, Raymond, and Paillet excavated between 1970–1973, 
uncovering more of the Ayyubid residential areas and Great Mosque as well as some 
of the Byzantine and Bronze Age periods.25 In 1973–1974, the main minaret was 
moved to another location to avoid inundation by the impending dam waters.26 Current 
work has been ongoing since 1996 jointly by Princeton University and the Syrian 
Directorate of Antiquities.27 Although the city has been partially lost to the lake 
excavations have uncovered the western city wall and residence areas from the 
 
Euphrate. Zone de contacts et d’échanges, edited by J. Cl. Margueron (Leiden, 1980), 389–396; A. 
Raymond and L. Golvin, “Meskeneh/Balis,” in Exposition des découvertes de la campagne 
internationale de sauvegarde des antiquités de l’Euphrate. Musée d’Alep, edited by Direction Générale 
des Antiquités et des Musées de la République Arabe Syrienne (Aleppo, 1974), 107–111; A. Raymond 
and J.-L.Paillet, Jean-Louis, Balis II. Histoire de Balis et fouilles des îlots I et II (Paris, 1995). 
internationale de sauvegarde des antiquités de l’Euphrate. Musée d’Alep, edited by Direction Générale 
des Antiquités et des Musées de la République Arabe Syrienne, (Aleppo, 1974), 20–21; Bahnassi, “Le 
Sauvetage des vestiges,” 57–70. 
2000): 35–57. 

Byzantine to Ayyubid periods. Interestingly, the site of the relocated minaret, on a 
high plateau just south of the city (Area C) proved to be the location of a fortified 
square enclosure dating to the Umayyad period. The structure is 67 x 77 m with two 
gates, four corner towers and the remains of an external bath and stucco paneling. 
Coordinates: 37N N 3983024 E 419730 
Bayās 
(see Chapter 4) 
Coordinates: 37N N 4071391 E 251306 
Būqā 
(see Chapter 2) 
Coordinates: 37N N 4054953 E 269569 
Dābiq 
Location 
 Dābiq is located in Syria north of Ḥalab, east of ‘Azaz, west of Manbij, and not far 
from the Turkish border. The modern town of the same name covers most of the site 
today. In 1516, a decisive battle between the Ottomans and the Mamlūks was fought 
on its plains (Marj Dābiq).
History 
 The caliph Sulayman b. ‘Abd al-Malik moved his base from the capital in Dimashq 
to Ramla to Dābiq to be closer during Maslama’s campaign against Constantinople in 
717. In 778, a small Arab force moved from Dābiq to help counter an invasion against 
Mar‘ash its plain by the Byzantines but many died and few returned. In 804, Qāsim, 

the son of Hārūn al-Rashīd established a ribāṭ.
against the Byzantines and passed Dābiq. He entered enemy territory and took 
Byzantine fortresses. The ‘Abbāsid caliph al-Mu‘taṣim stayed at Dābiq. 
Coordinates: 37N N 4045025 E 345134 
Dulūk 
Classical Doliche; Modern Dülükbaba, Dülük 
Location 
 The site is in a valley 10 km northwest of Gaziantep. Dulūk is marked with a sign 
and reached from the Narlı–Antep road. Before the yellow sign marked Dülük a road 
goes through a village for 4 km, then a right turn before a railroad underpass leads 
towards the mound. Farther down the road, turning left past the railroad underpass 
there is a hill with some Roman type tombs cut into it. The village of Dülük is a 
station on the Malatya railway line. The city is on a low long hill (Keber Tepesi), half 
a kilometer east of the modern village of Dülük and covered with vineyards. Dülük, 
Sinclair notes, was an important road stop along the Mar‘ash–Urfa road and 
(perplexingly) the Ḥalab–Anṭākiya road, although this seems strange.29 Ainsworth 
confuses it with Aintab (Gaziantep).30 He states that it was placed on the Tables 
(Peutinger?) on the road from Nicopolis (Islahiye) to Zeugma, twenty-one Roman 
miles from Zeugma en route to Sumaysāṭ/Samosata. 
 

History31
 The site was originally the classical city of Doliche. It was famous as a worship 
center for the cult of Jupiter Dolichenus, an incarnation appealing mainly to the 
military, and the worship of Mithras. The temple was built on a hill called Dülük Baba 
(Tepesi) and lasted from the early first millennium B.C.E. to the Persian invasion in 
235/36 when it was destroyed. In the Late Roman period it was a large town with 
bishops noted between 325–553. Around the time Anṭākiya was taken, Abu ‘Ubayda 
took Dulūk along with Manbij and Ra’ban by peace treaty. In the early days of 
conquest, the conquered peoples of Dulūk and Ra’ban were requested to act as spies 
on the Byzantines for the Islamic rulers. In 746, Constantine Copronymos conquered 
the region of Dulūk from the Muslims. Around 753 C.E., ‘Abdalla b. ‘Alī, directed by 
Abū al-‘Abbās, launched a summer raid with an army composed of Syro-Jazīrans, 
Khurāsānīs, and people of Mawṣil. He went to Dulūk but never entered the Taurus. 
Ibn Rusta in 903 C.E. mentions it as a thughūr site. Between 793–817 and 936–953 
there were ten bishops, the first known as the bishop of “Dulūk and Mabbug” 
(Manbij). The town continued until the mid-eleventh century C.E. and the village 
continued until the thirteenth century. It had a Syrian Orthodox bishopric and was 
known as a Christian episcopate of the Euphratensis province and favored by 
Armenians and Syro-Greeks. Yāqūt mentioned that Dulūk was changed to ‘Ayntab 
(Gaziantep). Abū al-Fidā’ mentions that Dulūk was located a little north of ‘Ayntab 
and ruined by the fourteenth century. 
 
Burgen, 47–50. 

Research 
 Sinclair writes that to the northwest near the bottom of the hill were traces of the 
city wall, which he dated as Middle Byzantine tenth–eleventh century (from his visit 
in 1976). In the valley slope occupied by a present ridge is a cemetery with rock cut 
tombs. The largest cave at the west end, called Basamaklı Mağara, was an eleventh 
century Syrian Orthodox cave church and the monastery of Mar Shlemun (eighth–
tenth centuries). Recent excavations have uncovered Islamic period finds at the site of 
Dülük Baba. Current research is being conducted by Engelbert Winter who is 
excavating with a team from the University of Münster.32 Although their work has 
focused on the sanctuary of Jupiter Dolichenus and the two mithraeums found at the 
mound of Dülük Baba, they have identified the main city, necropolis, and churches to 
the north of the mound. 
Personal Observations, 9/25/04 
 On the side of the Dülük Baba mound were caves, rock-cut chambers, and tombs 
carved and fields and remants of reused rubblestone on the hill. There was much Late 
Roman and Early Islamic pottery scattered about. On top of the hill were more scatters 
but more sporadic and less dense. The area north of the mound is presumably the Late 
Roman and Early Islamic site, however, the presence of Late Roman and Early Islamic 
ceramics on the mound is interesting, particularly if it represents an occupation. The 
 
Winter, “Doliche in hellenistisch-römischer Zeit. Eine kommagenische Stadt zwischen Tradition und 
Innovation,” in Stadt und Stadtentwicklung in Kleinasien, edited by E. Schwertheim and E. Winter, 
Asia Minor Studien 50 (Bonn, 2003), 51–67. 

mound occupation would be unusual for these periods, however, it is likely a 
continuation of the space as the aforementioned monastery in the Early Islamic period. 
Coordinates: 37N N 4113393 E 354515 
Al-Ḥadath (al-Ḥamrā’) 
Classical Adata; Armenian Kynuk (rendered in Arabic: Kaynūk, and in Turkish: 
Göynük); Kurdish al-Hatt; Modern Bozlar 
Location 
 Ḥadath has never been positively identified although its strategic location guarding 
the mountain pass (Darb al-Ḥadath) from Mar‘ash to al-Bustān (Albistan/Elbistan) is 
frequently mentioned. Ramsey placed it north of Kahramanmaraş, arguing against 
Weil who placed it south of Kahramanmaraş between it and Manbij.33 This was 
partially from Ramsay’s reasoning that Ḥadath was always easier to attack instead of 
Mar‘ash: “Adata was a fortress a little north of Germanicia defending the pass to 
Arabissos.”34 Le Strange placed on the Ak Su near Inikli north of the lake.35 Hartmann 
changed it to a location south of the lake in 1950 at the site of Seray Köy.36 Sinclair 
follows Hartmann and both are, I believe correct.37 It lies in a narrow fertile valley 
made up of a chain of lakes of the Ak Su near the village of Başpınar, formerly 
 

Aksaray or Serayköy and reached from the northeast along the Gölbaşı–Narlı road. 
From there, one crosses the valley to its northwest side, a distance of about 19–20 km. 
According to Sinclair from his visit in 1973, the site was mounded and possibly a 
citadel site with a late medieval hamam. He does not mention the large and 
unmistakable city walls, which is curious (see below). Abū al-Fidā’ states that Ḥadath 
is located twelve miles from a place on the main channel of the Jayhān where the river 
crossed at the Ford of the Alid. The site was watered by the Nahr Jūrīth or Hūrīth (Ak 
Su), a tributary of the Jayhān. Its source was the ‘Ayn Zanitha which joined the river 
al-‘Arjan and formed a series of small lakes according to Ibn Serapion. As such, the 
site is in a valley containing both lake and marsh. This corresponds to the present day 
Ak Su near Inikli (according to Le Strange). Istakhri mentions that fertile lands 
surrounded the site. Ibn Shaddād mentions plenty of running water (streams) and 
cultivated fields. Ibn ‘Adīm mentions there was much fish in the Ḥadath lake. Its name 
(mentioned by Yāqūt) was al-Ḥadath al-Hamra due to the reddish color of the soil 
(and to distinguish it from Ḥadath al-Zuqaq in the Palmyrene desert). Ory places 
Ḥadath at the entry of a saddle between Mar‘ash and Malaṭiya guarding the road to 
Albistan.38 He further states that it was in the plain, 1000 m at the foot of the Taurus 
near three lakes on the upper course of the Ak Su. The pass was narrow and started 
northwest of Ḥadath in the Taurus mountain range known by one name as Nurunak 
Dağ. Ḥadath was reached via Roman road from the Göksu Bridge via Kaysūm 
 

(Keysum). Abu Ezzah could not find the site but posited that it must be one day from 
Mar‘ash in a north or northeast direction. 
History39
 The site of Ḥadath changed hands frequently on account of its strategic location. 
However, Haldon and Kennedy erroneously state that since it was located farther up 
the valley (although its location was unknown) then it was less exposed to raids.40
According to Ramsey many expeditions crossed at the Darb al-Ḥadath. Heraclius in 
640 marched through the pass to Arabissos, and apparently near Ḥadath. It should be 
cautioned that Ramsey seems to be referring to a pass north of Kahramanmaraş. There 
is no pass directly north but rather by Gölbaşı via Nurhak. 
 Ḥadath was only settled and fortified in the early ‘Abbāsid period apparently as a 
new settlement, although the site is identified with the classical site of Adata, and 
there is mention that it was taken under the Umayyad ‘Umar b. Ḥabīb b. Maslama by 
general ‘Iyad b. Ghanm. At this time, the name of the pass (Darb al-Ḥadath or “road of 
bad news”) was changed to Darb al-Salāma (“road of safety”). The Byzantines briefly 
took and destroyed it in 778–779 under Michael Lachamodrakon. From 778/79 and 
785/86 al-Hassān b. Qaḥṭaba built a mosque and undertook fortifications during the 
reign of the caliph al-Mahdī after damage to the sun-dried brick (libin) walls from the 
winter season. Balādhurī states that ‘
Alī b. Sulaymān (governor of al-Jazīra and 
Qinnasrīn under al-Mahdī) directed the reconstruction in 783/84 from a letter by the 
 
und Lykandos (Vienna, 1981); Vasiliev, Byzance et les Arabes, I,.95; Wheatley, The Places, n. 50, 407, 
120; Cahen, La Syrie du Nord, 121; Canard, Histoire de la Dynastie, 269. 
 

caliph. The town was also named al-Mahdīya or al-Muḥammadīya. Al-Mahdī died at 
the same time the restoration was complete and a garrison of 6,000 soldiers was 
established. Musa al-Hādī repopulated it with people from nearby towns. Another 
Byzantine attack where the city was burned lent the name Göynük or Kaynuk (burnt) 
to it.41 It was then restored and refortified by Harūn al-Rashīd who garrisoned 2,000 
men, giving them housing and land under iqṭa‘. This was carried out by Muḥammad b. 
Ibrāhīm, son of the imām Ibrāhīm who was governor of the Jazīra and Qinnasrīn under 
the caliph al-Hādī. Basil in 877 attempted to take Mar‘ash but failed so attempted to 
siege Adata, but again failed and so he destroyed a little town called Geron (Geronta) 
in the vicinity. He tried again in 880 and was successful. Ramsay assumed he used the 
Göksun–Mar‘ash pass as the Albistan–Mar‘ash route was under Islamic control. From 
817 it was a bishopric until the mid-eleventh century when the seat moved to nearby 
Ra‘bān (Araban). Near to the site, a small castle called al-Uhaydab (the little 
hunchback) was located on a hill and protected the site. 
 Sayf al-Dawla’s poet, al-Mutanabbī composed a qaṣīda about the castle. It is noted 
that in 946 (or 948/49?) Bardas, the general of Constantine, captured Hadath. In 950 
Leo, son of Bardas Phocas, conquered it and dismantled its fortifications. In 954, the 
Ḥamdānids under Sayf al-Dawla reconquered it and rebuilt its walls. This was 
immortalized in another poem by al-Mutanabbī. The Byzantines took it again in 957. 
In 1150, the Seljuk Mas’ud, son of Qilij Arslan controlled it for a time and were 
replaced by the Armenians. In 1272 or 1278 the Mamluks under Baybars burned the 
 
Arabic sources as “Kainuk” it is not Arabic but Turkish sounding and its origin is unclear. An Arabic 
translation would be al-muḥtariqa. 

town down. During the time of Ibn Shaddād’s text (1272–1281), the fortress was 
ruined but the town remained and was in Islamic control. The surrounding land was a 
grazing area for Kurds. In 1436, the Mamlūk Barsbay used it as a base. 
Research 
 As the site has not been properly identified, the site has never been surveyed. In 
December 1987, two Arabic inscriptions were found at the site by a British survey.42
The first possibly mentions the ‘Abbāsid caliph al-Hadi (785–786) while the second 
dates to the early tenth century.43 
Personal Observations, 9/25/04 
 The site is in the Gölbaşı Valley in the village of Bozlar and not Başpınar on the 
right side of the road near the town government building. It is reached from the Narlı–
Gölbaşı road turnoff towards Çağlayancit. It is very deliberately placed squarely at the 
entrance of a pass through the Taurus Mountains, certainly the Darb al-Ḥadath. The 
site is near a spring and is composed of a massive city wall preserved for some 50 
meters with limestone ashlars and a rubble/mortar core and square buttresses at 
intervals. The top consists of plowed fields and some houses. The pottery is Roman 
through Early Islamic. Parts of the valley would have contained a string of lakes and 
marshes that would have been adjacent to the site. A rounded hill to the west (and 
slightly south) nearer to the pass might be the fortified site of al-Uhaydab, but I did not 
 
Institute of Archaeology at Ankara as part of the Adıyaman survey, cf. Blaylock, “Adıyaman Survey 
1985–1991,” 110. Blaylock does identify the site with Ḥadath. 

investigate this. Al-Uhaydab may have been built later as an upland fortified 
component to the lowland site and what was destroyed by the time of Baybars (as 
opposed to the town). 
Coordinates: 37N N 4173794 E 362406 
Hārūnīyya 
Classical Neronias, Irenopolis; Modern Düziçi 
Location and Research 
 Hārūnīyya has not been identified, although there are several candidates for its 
location, all of which fall within the one day’s march distance from Mar‘ash, as 
mentioned in the sources. Sinclair saw Hārūnīyya as the successor city after Hierapolis 
Castabala and Flaviopolis (Kadırlı) fade out and as such places it in the same area. The 
city should also guard the Amanus pass east to Mar‘ash and farther points east and so 
should be strategically similar to Toprakkale to the south and Hierapolis to the north. 
He astutely stated that it was probably on the plain, posits that it should be at the 
northeast inlet of the Cilician Plain into the Amanus, and suggested that it maybe a site 
locally known as Eskişehir, thought to be a Roman camp. The site is a mound 250 m 
long and 3 m high located 5 km from Osmaniye towards Bodrum Kale (Hierapolis 
Castabala).44 Honigmann’s location was in the Amanus at Bağdacık (now Buğdaycık) 
 
Sinclair’s directions of the mound of Eski Sehir. From Osmaniye I drove toward Bodrum Kale 
(Hierapolis Castabala). First one passes the town of Cevdet, then a large river/canal with a dam and the 
road forks left and right. To the left, towards the Roman site, one passes through another village. The 
right fork leads to the only prominent mound, a low and long one, not far past the river and wetland 
area. The mound had some mortared walls that I inspected, but this proved to be recent. There was 

on the Hasanbeyli Pass 25 km northeast of Osmaniye. Hellenkemper and Hild sited it 
at the classical city of Irenopolis which corresponds just 2 km southwest of modern 
Düziçi, 54 km southwest from Kahramanmaraş (the assumed Mar‘ash/Germanicia), 
105 km northeast from Adana, and 29.5 km north from Osmaniye at the entrance of 
the Darb al-‘Ayn (Bahçe Pass) over the Amanus.45
 Edwards and many others assume46 that it was the medieval castle called 
Hārūnīyya Kalesi although no Early Islamic presence, from material culture or 
architecture, has ever been noted.47 According to Sinclair, the castle is reached by 
traveling on the Osmaniye–Gaziantep road 17 km, then left 14 up a hill. Alishan 
incorrectly calls this site Til Hamdoun, which should rather be identified with 
Toprakkale.48 Hārūnīyya castle is built on a rocky outcrop of the steep lower scrubby 
slopes of the western side of the Amanus. To the southwest is the eastern inlet of 
Cilician Plain, to the northwest is the small Andırın Ovası and Ceyhan. Next to the 
castle is a late medieval town to the east and fountain. Sinclair dates the castle as 
Teutonic and describes it in detail. Edwards contends based on the masonry that the 
design is not Armenian as it is too “compact.” The tower with an elongated keep 
employs three types of masonry with the earliest original fortification identical in plan 
 absolutely no pottery on the site. I questioned the villagers extensively but they revealed no information 
regarding the mound of Eskişehir. 
Osmaniye from Kahramanmaraş. Edwards, Fortifications, 143. 
 
1899), 236ff. 

and built of squared limestone and basalt. The castle, measuring 75 x 30 m had an 
entrance with a simple gate between two square towers. At the other end was a postern 
gate near a large horseshoe tower. He specifically highlights the north curtain wall that 
contains a series of arched embrasures with arrow slits and a rounded stirrup arch at 
the bottom of each. These are the “only certain examples of Arab embrasures in 
Cilicia.” He suggests that the casemates may be Mamluk or attributed to other 
medieval construction. Despite these detailed descriptions, nothing early is mentioned 
about the site itself. Edwards’ main argument, apart from the name, seems to stem 
from the fact that Balādhurī “specifically” [italics Edwards] refers to Hārūnīyya as a 
fort. 
 Subsequent accounts describe it as a fort and/or city. Since virtually nothing is 
known about Early Islamic forts and the meaning of the word ḥiṣn can describe 
fortified sites in the most general sense (see Chapter 7), there is no basis for the 
argument. Kennedy stated that Islamic geographers described it as a “small fort” (ḥiṣn 
saghir).49 Reviewing Edwards’ identification of the fort of Hārūnīyya, Kennedy found 
the dating vague and supposed it probably was built in a later period. He stated that 
only the design might be early but the structure does not resemble Early Islamic 
fortifications. Mention of the castle’s building, the town, and lands are associated with 
the Armenian King of Cilicia in 1236. In 1337, it was abandoned by the Mamluks. 
The likelier candidate for the Early Islamic site, suggested by Hellenkemper and Hild 
but has not been fully explored, is the lower town that would correspond with classical 
Irenopolis. 
 

History50
 There is no known pre-Byzantine occupation for Irenopolis, however the region 
around the site was known as Lakanatis at least in the Seleucid/Hellenistic period 
where coins were minted from this area.51 In the mid-fourth century the site is referred 
to as the city of Nero, or Neronias, in the province of Cilicia II, which had a bishopric 
led by a bishop named Narcissus. Although some sources state that Irenopolis (former 
Neronias) apparently came to an end by the end of the fourth century C.E.52 A key 
association which gives some indication as to its general location in eastern Cilicia 
comes from Malalas who states that Balbinus the Isaurian (along with the Tzannoi, a 
Black Sea tribe, and the Huns) destroyed the cities of Anazarbus, Irenopolis, and 
Castabala53 — all of which were located in the eastern part of Cilicia II. It likely 
continued and was rebuilt as evidenced at Anazarbus and Castabala Hierapolis. 
Further, the site is mentioned in the mid-fifth century as a city whose name had 
changed to Irenopolis (probably before 395 C.E.).54 The Notitia dignitatum states 
 
of Numismatics 1 (1989): 171–93; T. H. Weir, “Hārūnīyya” EI2, 234–235; Cahen, La Syrie du Nord,
145–49; Wheatley, The Places, 120; Le Strange, Lands, 129; U. B. Alkım, “The Amanus Region in 
Turkey: New Light on the Historical Geography and Archaeology,” Archaeology 22 (1969): 280–89. 
05. 
Erforschung Kleinasiens: Hundert Jahre Kleinasiatische Kommission der Österreichischen Akademie 
der Wissenschaften, edited by G. Dobesch and G. Rehrenböck (Vienna, 1993), 221-25; E. Honigmann, 
“Neronias-Irenopolis in Eastern Cilicia,” Byzantion 20 (1950): 39–61. 
the Second Cilicia which we now call Irenopolis,” H.E. I.7.14 (p. 33). 

Irenopolis as the only town that manufactured spears, which led Honigmann to 
conclude it was located near forested mountains (where straight and tall wood could 
be obtained).55 From other sources, the site was placed in the vicinity of Castabala and 
Epiphaneia in the extreme eastern part of the province. 
 The city appears in 831 C.E. alongside the main frontier towns of Ṭarsūs, Maṣṣīṣṣa, 
Adhana, and ‘Ayn Zarba as sources for the Muslim army of 20,000 defeated by 
Theophilus. Another source revealed a succession of thirteen Jacobite bishops from 
818–922. From these mentions, it is clear that the city remained populous and 
important.56 Honigmann looked for the translation of the name Irenopolis (the city of 
peace) as the Arabic place name. His search for madinat al-salam, also the ‘Abbāsid 
name for Baghdād, lead him to search for Little Baghdād (Bughaidīd) which he found 
as a town in eastern Cilicia mentioned by Ibn al-Shiḥna identified with Kafarbayyā, 
part of Maṣṣīṣa. Honigmann speculated that this may be incorrect and that Bughaidīd 
survived as the Turkish Bağdacik near Savuran Kale and Zincerli, eighteen miles from 
Osmaniye, south of the Hamusçay and 5 km southwest of the railway station Bahçe. 
The Turkish word is a diminutive derived from Bağdadcik, meaning Little Baghdād. 
 According to Balādhurī, Hārūnīyya was apparently a city established de novo in 
799 by Hārūn al-Rashid one march west of Mar‘ash. Hoewver, both Balādhurī and 
Ya‘qūbī, stated that it was built before his reign (during the time of al-Mahdī) and 
 
 
the second half of 915 under the Armenian Mleḥ (Malīḥ al-Armanī) who took 50,000 prisoners from the 
area between Ṭarsūs and Mar‘ash (Ibid.) 

completed it in his own caliphate. According to Ibn Ḥawqal, Istakhrī, and al-Balkhī (d. 
934), it was small fort (ḥisṇān saghirān) situated on the western slopes of the Amanus 
in one of its paths or gorges or valleys (fī ba‘aḍ shi‘abihi).57 Further, Ibn Hawqal talks 
about its prosperity and how its inhabitants are bravely involved in jihād against the 
Byzantines. In 959–960, Yāqūt mentions that Nicephorus captured 1,500 Muslim 
residents from the site. Sayf al-Dawla took it in 967 and paid for its construction and a 
neighboring town (a village 3 km south with same name, according to Edwards). It 
was captured by Crusaders and later became part of Little Armenia. 
Personal Observations, 7/22/05 
 I followed Hellenkemper and Hild’s identification of Hārūnīyya with Irenopolis 
near modern Düziçi. This town lies on the low western slopes of the Amanus and is 
reached either by taking the E-90 new highway to the Bahçe exit and driving north, or 
taking the road northeast from Osmaniye to Bahçe and then turning right heading 
north to Düziçi. The way takes one out of the Cilician Plain and briefly into the 
Amanus western slopes before heading back into a small plain which Düziçi 
overlooks. This is the Düziçi Ovası, a separate extension east of the Cilician Plain and 
is mainly enclosed by outlier hills and outcrops of the Amanus. The town of 
Hārūnīyya/Irenopolis is on the lowest slopes of the Amanus just slightly above the 
plain. The Deliçay River flows through the town from the mountains. I first drove past 
Düziçi to the village of Hārūnīyya and several locals pointed me first to the Hārūnīyya 
castle on the hill still north of the town. Near it were also the remains of a building 
 

complex dating to the early twentieth century Ottoman period. It was apparently built 
by the Germans. As for the site of Irenopolis, it is 2 km west southwest of the modern 
Düziçi in Hacılar, as Hellenkemper and Hild point out. It should be noted that this is 
not Hacılar Köy 2 km northeast but rather a quarter of the modern town and the old 
name of it, also known by locals as Harab. It lies slightly down slope. There are many 
small houses and the gardens, fields, and orchards were littered with a high-density 
scatters of ceramics and roof tiles. Building stones including ashlars can be seen built 
into the modern houses. Two houses had columns in their gardens, one of porphyry. 
One house had an outdoor courtyard bounded to the south by the remains of a small 
aqueduct consisting of a ceramic pipe mortared in rubble stone. This probably 
corresponds with traces of a similarly constructed aqueduct found on the way to 
Hacılar village. As a result, one can assume that water was fed by aqueduct via 
mountain spring. Behind one house was a new foundation being put in for a building. 
The pier holes in the ground showed some in situ walls and rooftiles potentially part of 
buildings or a cemetery although no bone was noted. Rather, a late LRC base was 
found dating to the sixth/seventh century. The walls were not far below the surface 
(40-50 cm). Furthermore in the basement of one house was a large mosaic of a 
Byzantine style. It depicted grape vine creating circular panels and birds, including 
geese. This may have been part of a church. Early Islamic inscriptions mentioned by 
Hellenkemper and Hild near an old government building in Greek and Kufic were not 
located (nor the government building). All in all, there were no definite Early Islamic 
sherds in the area or Roman for that matter. However, a local museum in town run by 

a schoolteacher and registered privately by the Adana museum contained a surprising 
amount of ‘Abbāsid silver dirhams (nearly a hundred) and an Umayyad triple nozzle 
lamp. According to him, these came from Düziçi and its surrounding farms. Given the 
combination of these materials, the Kufic inscription, and the site strategically located 
near the Bahçe Pass/Darb al-‘Ayn across the Amanus, and the presence of a 
preexisting Late Roman/Byzantine settlement, it is quite likely that the Early Islamic 
Hārūnīyya was located in the same place or just near it. 
Coordinates: 37N N 4125125 E 273665 
Ḥiṣn al-Tīnāt 
(see chapter 4) 
Coordinates: 37N N 4083216 E 246048 
Ḥiṣn Kamkh 
Classical Kamacha, Chomacha; Modern Kemah 
Location 
 Kamkh was located far north in the part of the frontier known as the thughūr al-bakrīya on the upper Euphrates in what Le Strange calls the western Euphrates, that 
area east of the river to the north. It was one day’s journey (50 km) below Arzanjān 
(modern Erzincan) on the left or south bank in the river basin. The site’s strategic 
importance was for entrance through passes into Armenia. 

History58
 The site is mentioned by Balādhurī, Ibn Serapion, and earlier geographers. 
Balādhurī states that Ḥabīb b. Maslama attacked Ḥiṣn Kamkh after he took Shimshāṭ
but was unable to take it. Ṣafwān b. Mu‘aṭṭal al-Sulami also failed. Finally, in 678, 
Ṣafwān successfully took the site with the help of ‘Umar b. al-Ḥabīb who scaled the 
walls. Under Yazīd II, Kamkh was taken in 724. Kamkh and its inhabitants of the 
Sulaym assisted Malaṭiya against the Byzantine invasion of 750 or 754. It shifted 
hands to the Byzantines then back to Maslama b. ‘Abd al-Malik then back to the 
Byzantines until it was retaken by al-Ḥassān b. Qaḥṭaba and al-‘Abbās b. al-Muḥammad b. ‘Alī under al-Manṣūr in 766. They camped around the site and seiged it 
with mangonels and mantelets (dabbāba).59 Al-‘Abbās brought in merchants and 
established a market, introducing Islamic currency into the area. The Byzantines 
retook it and then the Muslims under Muḥammad b. ‘Abdallā b. ‘Abd ar-Raḥmān b. 
Abī ‘Amra al-Anṣārī in 793. The site switched hands once more and was reoccupied 
during the reign of Ma’mūn briefly. Mustawfī said it was a great castle with a town 
below on the riverbank and many fertile villages which depended upon it. Dimashqī
in the fourteenth century lists it as part of the thughūr al-jazīra.
 
Kennedy, The Armies of the Caliph, 107; Blankinship, End of the Jihad State. 
(Aristocratic Violence, 60–65). 

Remains 
 Although remains of a castle can be seen, very little work has been done on the 
area.
Coordinates: 37N N 4383256 E 503197 
Ḥiṣn Manṣūr 
Classical Pordonnium?60; Modern Adıyaman
Location 
 The site of Ḥiṣn Manṣūr has always been identified with modern Adıyaman. 
Sinclair, however, writes nothing about the Early Islamic occupation at Adıyaman. He 
provides a city map61 and states that it succeeded Perre after its decline. Perhaps Ḥiṣn 
Manṣūr reassembled a population from the abandoned Perre. It is in a valley running 
southwest–northeast between the Taurus and the hills north of the Euphrates Valley in 
the Gaziantep–Adıyaman rolling plain and watered by a tributary of the Euphrates, the 
Nahr al-Azraq (Göksu) which flows northwest of Ḥiṣn Manṣūr. In the Mamlūk period, 
it was recorded on the route from between Sumaysāṭ and Malaṭiya. Ramsay states that 
the Roman road from Malaṭiya (Melitene) to Sumaysāṭ (Samosata) stopped at Maisena 
(Elemenjik then Khan Bunar), Lakotena (Viranşehir/Surghy), and Perre (Adıyaman), 
before reaching Sumaysāṭ.
62
 
with Perre, located several kilometers north of Ḥiṣn Manṣūr. However, it has also been noted as a 
separate site on a route between Sumaysāṭ and Perre in Talbert, Barrington Atlas, 1036. 

History63
 General opinion states that Ḥiṣn Manṣūr succeeded Perre after its decline. After the 
sixth century, Perrhe/Pirin had no bishops mentioned. The new town (or small 
fortress) was named Manṣūr not after the ‘Abbāsid caliph as often assumed. Rather, it 
was founded earlier in the Umayyad period. According to Abu ‘Amr al-Bahilī, it was 
named for a commander named Manṣūr b. Ja‘wana b. al-Ḥārith al-‘Āmirī of the Qays 
tribe under Marwān II. He was also governor of Ruhā (Edessa/Urfa) when the town 
revolted during the ‘Abbāsid revolution. After it had been destroyed by Byzantines, he 
was ordered to build and repair it with an army of Syrians and Jazīrans to fend off 
Byzantine incursions. This was done at the very end of Marwān’s reign, probably in 
750. Manṣūr stayed there with his military garrison after fending off a Byzantine 
attack. Manṣūr was also in charge of the shurta of ‘Abdulla. ‘Abdulla died in 758 by 
the caliph’s hands and the town fell to ruin. Harūn al-Rashid, during his father al-Mahdī’s caliphate, refortified the settlement and placed a new garrison. Ibn Ḥawqal 
described it as a small town with a congregational mosque surrounded by irrigated 
fields. It was continuously ravaged or dismantled by Byzantines and Muslims as all 
thughūr forts were. Yāqūt states that it had a wall with three gates and a ditch outside. 
The inner fortress was defended by a double wall. Around 930, it was seized by 
defector members of the Ḥabīb. It did not receive a bishop until the eleventh century. 
 
Palestine, 454; Canard, Histoire de la dynastie, 268. 

Ibn Shaddād states that it possessed rural districts (rustāq) and villages. Abū al-Fidā’ 
in the fourteenth century describes the site in ruin but still had cultivated fields. 
Research 
 The Blue Guide says there is possibly a citadel on the artificial mound in the town 
center. Today the tell rises above the city and has a tea garden on top. 
Personal Observations, 9/26/04 
 In the center of Adıyaman is a mound that rises up among the modern houses and is 
wooded, very similar but much smaller than Gözlü Kule in Tarsus. The classical site 
of Perre is north of Adıyaman by several kilometers and has a necropolis. In this case, 
it is an interesting example of an Early Islamic site not founded on the classical city. 
Although there I found nothing definitively Early Islamic on or around the tell, there is 
virtually nothing to be seen at all of any period. The location is in a plain with the hilly 
terrain to the north and south. It is in close proximity to Sumaysāṭ and south of 
Malaṭiya. Between it and Malaṭiya are passes through hills. Like Sumaysāṭ, it would 
not have defended any mountain pass but rather trade routes east–west (Sumaysāṭ to 
Mar‘ash) or north–south (Malaṭiya to Qūrus). 
Coordinates: 37N N 4179360 E 436191 

Ḥiṣn Qalawdiya 
Location 
 Very little is known about the site. Like Ḥiṣn Kamkh, it was part of the farthest 
eastern extent of the frontier, thughūr al-bakrīya. It guarded the approach to Malaṭiya 
from the east. 
History64
 Ḥiṣn Qalawdiya was fortified under the early ‘Abbāsids by al-Manṣūr in 757. It did 
not receive its first bishop until the early tenth century. 
Ḥiṣn Ziyād 
Classical Enzitene; Syriac Hanzīṭ; Armenian Khartabirt/Kharput; Modern Harput 
Location 
 Ḥiṣn Ziyād was also in the Upper Euphrates area in what Le Strange called the 
western Euphrates or area east of the Euphrates and north (Qālīqalā area). It lay west 
of Shimshāt. 
History 
 The site maybe named after a Ziyād who was a Slav stationed on the thughūr by 
Marwān b. Muḥammad. Around 930, the site was seized by the Ḥabīb who defected to 
Byzantine lands. Yāqūt describes it as a large town with a good climate. A Jacobite 
 

bishopric is mentioned at the site between 1027–1038. It was held by the Artuqids in 
the twelfth century.
Remains65
 Fiey posits the site as Tilenzit, east of Elazığ. Sinclair mentions the site but doesn’t 
mention any Early Islamic presence, although an Early Islamic bridge is mentioned 
nearby. An inscription from 1146–47 in Kufī and Naskhī script was found and 
represents one of the earliest few cursive inscriptions found outside Persia.
Coordinates: 37N N 4283871 E 522378 
 Iskandarūna 
(see Chapter 4) 
Classical Alexandretta ad Issum; Modern Iskenderun 
Location 
 The town is situated at the southern part of the Plain of Issos on the Gulf of 
Iskenderun where the coastal plain is widest, near Rhosos. It is also at the entrance to 
the Belen Pass (Syrian Gates), which connects the coast to the interior Amuq Plain. 
 
Ziyad in the Light of an Unnoticed Arab Inscription,” in Defence of the Roman and Byzantine 
Frontiers, edited by S. Freeman and H. Kennedy (Oxford, 1986), 9–21; Wheatley, The Places, 107; 
Sinclair, Eastern Turkey, 18–33, plates 6–10, maps; Le Strange, Lands, 117; S. Redford, “How Islamic 
Is It? The Innsbruck Plate and its Setting,” Muqarnas 7 (1990): 119–35; Dagron, “Minorités Ethniques 
et Religieuses.”

History66
 According to Ainsworth, the town was founded by Alexander for his horse. 
Balādhurī said, Iskandarūna belongs to Maslama b. ‘Abd al-Malik. In the Early Islamic 
period, a fort was said to have been constructed by Umm Ja‘
far Zubayda, wife of al-Rashīd and mother of Amīn. Balādhurī stated that it was given as iqṭa‘ to Raghā, a 
mawlā of al-Mahdī. Mahdī’s sons, Manṣūr and Ibrāhīm, inherited it. Then it went to 
Ibrāhīm b. Sa‘
īd al-Jawharī al-Baghdādī who left Baghdād and came to ‘Ayn Zarba 
and died between 867 and 878/79. Then it was bought by Aḥmad b. Abī Du’ād al-Iyādī, a mu‘
tazilī, grand qāḍī, and intimate friend of al-Ma’mūn who lost his position 
under al-Mutawakkil. Al-Iyādī renovated the construction during the caliphate of al-Wāthiq. Then it went to al-Mutawakkil, the caliph. Ibn Ṭūlūn took it in 877. The site 
was described as not being a castle but a polygonal fort near Jacob’s spring. The 
Crusader castle of Godefroy de Bouillon was close to it, about one mile in from the 
shore. It is likely that this castle was built on the site of Iskandarūna. It was also 
fortified by the kings of Armenian Cilicia. 
Remains 
 The site was recently surveyed by the Mopsus Survey project, and the results are 
unpublished. The surveyors concluded from surface collection around the city and a 
 
“Iskandarūna,” EI2; Ainsworth, A Personal Narrative of the Euphrates Expedition, I.12. 

sounding that the Hellenistic and Roman areas were south of the castle and the modern 
city.67
Coordinates: 37N N 4052271 E 248303 
Jawzāt (or Ḥiṣn al-Jawzāt) 
Location 
 Ibn Ḥawqal mentions it as part of the thughūr al-shamiyya. It was also mentioned 
by Yāqūt as being two days from Ṭarsūs. It was in a mountain pass overlooking 
Ṭarsūs eight farsakhs or 65 km away. Although unidentified today, it is probably near 
the sites of Bughaz or Pozantı near the Cilician Gates today.
History 
 It was a fortress that had a qaḍī (Abu ‘Amr al- Ṭarsūsī), an amir, a deputy amir, a 
preacher, a keeper of the fort, a keeper of the hammam, a clerk two couriers, a trumpet 
player, and troops. It is written that no women or unbearded boys were allowed. The 
description is valuable as it offers a view of a typical garrison and suggests that even a 
small frontier site had a bathhouse component. 
 

Al-Jūma 
Location 
 The site was part of the ‘awāṣim and mentioned by Ibn Khurradadhbih. It was 
supposedly on a hill overlooking the Amuq to the southeast and south of Qūrus which 
would place it in modern Syria. There is very little known about it.
Al-Kanīsa as-Sawdā’ 
Classical Oinianados, Epiphaneia, Kinisa?; Armenian or Crusader Nigrinium; Modern 
Gözeneler68
Location 
 Al-Kanīsa as-Sawdā’ lies at the heart of the basaltic Plain of Issos on an ancient 
lava bed at the eastern edge of the Cilician Plain at a low elevation on the southern 
edge of a series of low foothills. It is a large site enclosing a natural outcropping (not a 
tell) located 91 km southeast of Adana and 11 km south of Toprakkale at the northeast 
corner of the Mediterranean where the Adana and Hatay province meet. It is about 1.5 
km west of the railroad that cuts the aqueduct just south of the Erzin/Yeşilkent railway 
station (the Toprakkale-Iskenderun railline) and identified with the site of Güze 
Han/Gözeneler, the classical city of Epiphaneia. It is easily reached by traveling north 
from the Iskenderun/Dörtyol road toward Erzin and turning left to cross the railroad. It 
is 11 km south of Toprakkale (one day’s journey to the Amanus), and 7 km west of 
Erzin. An ancient road passed through it from Toprakkale to Baeae and in the Islamic 
 

periods Hārūnīyya and Bayās. There is also a local route from Erzin/Kanīsa al-Sawdā’ 
to Islahiye. The site is incorrectly identified as Issos with a sign. Marshy environs are 
suggested by the importation of Zuṭṭ people from southern Iraq (see below). Today, 
there is much cultivation of wheat and vegetables and the site is threatened by the 
newly constructed E-90 highway cutting through the western quarter of site. 
History 
 The site like many others was originally a Seleucid foundation. It was originally 
named Oiniandos,69 perhaps a Hellenized form of the Luwian Winowanda. Then, it 
was named after the Seleucid Antiochus IV Epiphanes or a descendant in the second 
century B.C.E. In the Roman period, Epiphaneia was in the province of Cilicia 
Campestris. It was the seat of a bishopric from the fourth century onward. In the fifth 
century it fell under the province of Cilicia II. It was thought to be the birthplace of St. 
George and a Christian episcopate. Pompey imprisoned pirates captured at sea there. 
 As a thughūr site, it appears as an ‘Abbāsid foundation established by Hārūn al-Rashid along with Hārūnīyya and ‘Ayn Zarba. As such it has been assumed to be a 
smaller fortification, more of an outpost than a city. The site is actually quite large and 
the implications of this will be discussed below. The classical site then was not 
“founded” but rather strengthened by Hārūn (allegedly after it was abandoned as 
indicated by the fortress in ruins) in 799 when it was known as Kanīsa al-Sawdā’ or 
“Black Church” as it was known to have been originally a Byzantine site built of 
 
Verlag Österreichischen Akad. Der Wiss, 1986), 103 n. 17; Seton-Williams, “Cilician Survey,” 155 
note a; Hild and Hellenkemper, Kilikien und Isaurien, 249-251. 

basalt. Hārūn is also known to have garrisoned Khurāsānīs, donate money, and collect 
taxes there, which is interesting as it is assumed taxes were not collected on the 
thughur). In 806, the Byzantines led by Nicephorus attacked it while Qāsim b. Rashīd 
was garrisoned (murābiṭ) there. He defended it using dabik (a naptha resin) to prevent 
them from beseiging and succeeded with reinforcements from Maṣṣīṣa. Like Ḥadath, 
the town had a nickname, “the Burnt” (al-muḥtariqa), which referred to an incendiary 
attack during a Byzantine incursion.70 After the invasion, Qāsim refortified and 
resupplied the city. Under al-Mu‘taṣim, Zụṭṭ were deported there and to the area of 
‘Ayn Zarba from marshes between Waṣit and Baṣra in 835. After 899, al-Mu‘taḍid 
stayed at Kanīsa al-Sawdā’ for two days while personally visiting Cilicia in order to 
settle growing power factions. Two bishops are known from the site of in 818 and 845 
and two more (“of Hamam and Kinisa” around 936/953.). Yāqūt calls the site al-Kanīsa, al-Kanīsa as-Sawdā’, or al-Kanīsa al-Yahūd alluding to a Jewish community. 
In the tenth century, Istakhrī mentions (940–960) that it had a Friday Mosque with a 
minbar and was located south of the Jayhān a distance from the sea but less than a day 
from Hārūnīyya and coastal site of Bayās. Just after, however, Ibn Ḥawqal (967–988) 
wrote that Kanīsa al-Sawdā’ used to be a fortress and thaghr, referring to the fact that 
it was taken in the Byzantine reconquest in 978. The site was named as Casale Keni in 
1214, and was given by the Armenian King Leon I to the Crusader order of St. John. 
The former city was a small village during this time.71 Abū al-Fidā’ in the fourteenth 
 

century writes that it stood twelve miles from Hārūnīyya in Armenian territory. In the 
sixteenth century, a Greek manuscript mentions the site of Keinision. 
Remains 
 Identification of the site has not always been unanimous. The two issues are 1) 
identifying the site as Epiphaneia; and 2) then as Kanīsa al-Sawdā’. Ainsworth visited 
the site and identified it with Epiphaneia.72 He disagreed with Langlois who identified 
Epiphaneia with Myriandros. Gough (surveyed the site of Epiphaneia with his wife 
after ‘Ayn Zarba but unfortunately there is no plan or complete publication.73 Seton-Williams in her Cilician survey identifies Site 146 (Güzen Han) with Epiphaneia.74
She described it as a large site with surrounding extensive settlement fed by a large 
aqueduct. Her identification of the site comes from Major Bennet in Ramsay75 and 
Kiepert. Furthermore, she noted Roman, Late Roman, and Islamic ceramics. For the 
identification with Kanīsa al-Sawdā’, Edwards perplexingly does not record the site of 
Epiphaneia and so is impressed with the task of trying to fit the known frontier site in 
with those castles of his survey. He makes an argument that the Early Islamic Kanīsa 
al-Sawdā’ is to be identified with Karafrenk, a small preserved square fort near the 
Bahçe Pass in the Amanus. The criteria for his arguments are that the structure must 
have been built of basalt in the vicinity of Hārūnīyya and Maṣṣīṣa. He first states that 
 

the construction is similar to two other forts that are probably Crusader and that the 
fort may corroborate with the Crusader site, “The Black Tower.”76 Nevertheless he 
still associates the site with the Early Islamic Kanīsa al-Sawdā’ and this is further 
supported by accounts of Abū al-Fidā’ who states that Kanīsa al-Sawdā’ is twelve 
miles from Hārūnīyya, which corresponds with Karafrenk. Abū al-Fidā’, whose 
distances are inconsistantly accurate and inaccurate, is a fourteenth century source and 
not suitable for locating an Early Islamic site by any means. Cahen, who identified 
Kanīsa al-Sawdā’ with the village of Erzin is much more accurate,77 although Edwards 
disagrees with him. Sinclair identified Güze Han with Epiphaneia and considers 
Karafrenk as Crusader and maybe Teutonic like the castles of Hārūnīyya and 
Hasanbeyli.78 A tell called Kara Hüyük surveyed by Seton Williams (Site 147 on her 
survey), seven km southeast of Erzin was possibily Kanīsa al-Sawdā’ but seems 
incorrect as no classical or Islamic remains were found. 
 The only real treatment of Kanīsa al-Sawdā’ is by Jennifer Tobin who mentions it 
within a regional study of the nearby site of Küçük Burnaz to the south. Tobin visited 
the site annually between 1993 and 2000 and recorded her observations including the 
identification of the site with Epiphaneia and Kanīsa al-Sawdā’. Tobin observed that 
the site encompassed 150 ha (from Hellenkemper and Hild) and the acropolis sat on a 
natural formation made higher over time by occupational layering. Finally, the 
Mopsus survey in 2004 identified the site as Site 1, Gözeneler/Epiphaneia/ Kanīsa al-
 

Sawdā’ and did a surface collection and mapped the site. The Mopsus survey 
measured the acropolis as 160 x 60 m, and 0.75 ha. They were the first to establish the 
presence of some Iron and Bronze Age sherds. Persian and Hellenistic pottery was 
scattered around the acropolis in a 6.0-7.8 ha area. The Roman-Byzantine and “early 
Medieval city” area of ceramic scatter was circa 66 ha. They argued that the 150 ha 
mentioned by Tobin, Hellenkemper, and Hild was too large, although they also noted 
an extramural settlement. 
 The main feature of the site is the theater on the southwest of the mound. At a 
diameter of 87 m it is the largest theater in Cilicia. Although the scene and seats are 
robbed, the upper wall of the cavea survived in the preserved eastern wall. The wall is 
built of mortar and rubble with facing of irregularly polygonal shaped basalt stones in 
rough courses and semi-circular buttresses set at close intervals. This wall also served 
as part of the citadel’s external defense walls. The walls of the castle were heavily 
robbed and architectural debris (columns, bricks, and tiles) lay everywhere. South of 
theater was a round structure, possibly an odeon according to Tobin. Marble column 
bases in the area form three sides of colonnaded court or agora in field below. There is 
also the suggestion of a colonnaded street. 200 m southwest of the theater is a 
structure of mortar and rubble, robbed of its facing stones. The structure is a bath, 
evidenced from hypocaust tiles. Tobin noted the presence of much thirteenth century 
sgraffiato ware including many fragments of kiln furniture of a thirteenth century type 
positing that Kanīsa al-Sawdā’ may have been a medieval pottery manufacturing 
center. The Mopsus survey also found a large quantity of medieval pottery and 

supported this hypothesis. During Ainsworth’s visit he could see partial standing walls 
of the city. Gough in 1952 also recorded a large city wall two m thick with large 
square towers at intervals. These were though to be the Late Roman or Medieval 
walls.79 Sinclair states that the medieval site of Kanīsa al-Sawdā’ was much smaller, 
contracting around the citadel and only scattered traces remain. In 1951, a medieval 
wall well was observed but there are no more traces of the city wall, having been 
destroyed in 196980 and by 1983 nothing remained. To the west, a cemetery contained 
graves and tombs cut into bedrock. The aqueduct either brought water down from 
Amanus in the southeast or was spring fed by a spring near to Erzin. The aqueduct was 
supported on low rounded arches with 116 piers. It flowed into a circular cistern made 
of mortar and rubble with basalt ashlar facing near the citadel (east) whose walls were 
1.5 m thick. The structure may have been a castellum divisorum or nymphaeum. There 
were remains of residential areas along the aqueduct. Greek inscriptions were found at 
the site. 
Personal Observations, 8/2/04 
 The advantage of the site is its strategic location between the sea and mountains 
and in its protection of the coastal route from Cilicia south towards Anṭākiya to the 
west of the Amanus. The polygonal mortared buttress wall outside of the theater was 
the most conspicuous and best preserved and warranted a date. I noticed a 
Hellenistic/Roman potsherd set in the mortar. Although polygonal architecture is 
 

suggestive of Hellenistic, the buttresses seem Islamic and the fortification of the 
theater walls does not make sense for periods which the theatre was in use. A distant 
parallel for this is the fortified walls with buttresses surrounding the amphitheatre of 
Caesarea Maritima in Palestine, which was likely the locus for the Early Islamic site. 
Here, I would suggest that this was part of the Middle Islamic/Medieval settlement 
fortification of the outcrop, as polygonal architecture is rare for the Early Islamic 
period in this area. On the outcrop near the top of the city wall I found a piece of 
Syrian yellow-glaze. South of the rocky outcrop the mound slopes down and 
encompasses a large area with some plowed fields, some untouched areas and even 
farther south into an orchard. Much Medieval pottery lies around these areas, 
specifically the bath. Ruined buildings with high preserved walls including a bath and 
what are termed two churches (although this is speculative, as they seem more Roman 
basilica buildings but pre-Christian) lie near to one another on the western part of the 
mound. North of the rocky outcrop is a plowed field with three ruined small mounds 
left unplowed, suggestive of subterranean structures. It is difficult to assess the Early 
Islamic settlement. One would assume that the rocky outcrop may have held an 
outpost of small kale and the settlement was within the classical city. Large city walls 
were not noticed. 
 I examined the pottery with Andrea de Giorgi from the 2004 season of the Mopsus 
Survey. Site 2, Kara Höyük, yielded only Hellenistic, Roman and Middle Islamic 
pottery making it ineligible for an Early Islamic site. Site 1, Kanīsa al-Sawdā’, had 
thirteen baskets of pottery with a straight continuity of Hellenistic through Middle 

Islamic. In addition, the Late Bronze, Middle Iron Age, and Persian periods are 
represented. The Early Islamic and Byzantine forms were less well represented. I 
would argue that this was due to the fact that the survey was conducted by three Iron 
Age archaeologists with a Late Bronze/Early Iron Age focus and so the terra sigillata, 
Late Roman redwares, and glazed wares of the Middle Islamic figured more 
prominently as they were more conspicuous then the more diagnostic cooking and 
unglazed wares of the Byzantine/Early Islamic periods. 
Coordinates: 36N N 43750 E 95800 
Malaṭiya 
Classical Melitene, Maladnā; Modern Battalgazi (Eski Malatya) 
Location 
 The city of Battalgazi is a suburb of Malatya and 12 km north of Malatya on the 
Sivas road. The site, mentioned by Ya‘qūbī, was built on level ground and surrounded 
by mountains inhabited by the Byzantines. The ancient city was in the lowland 
Malatya Plain and watered by the Qubāqib River (classical Melas/modern 
Tukhman/Tokhma Su/Dermes Su) flowing on its east side and quite near to the 
Euphrates. From Roman times, the city guarded a Euphrates crossing at Imikuşağı. A 
garrison from Malaṭiya also guarded a bridge across the Qubāqib River three miles 
from the city where it met with the Euphrates. This was on the road west into 
Byzantine territory. Ramsay mentions several major roads from Malaṭiya.81 The 
Roman road over the Anti-Taurus passed through Arabissos–Darende east to Malaṭiya 
 

on the Qubāqib/Tokhma Su Pass. This also indicates the direction of 
Byzantine/Islamic attack. There was also a road from Malaṭiya to Arca/Arga–Soğutlu 
Irmak–Arabissos–Kokusos that could accommodate wheeled transport. The Malaṭiya– 
Sumaysāṭ road included the route Malaṭiya/Melitene–Maisena (Elemenjik, then Khan 
Bunar)–Lakotena/Viranşehir–Perre/Adıyaman–Sumaysāṭ/Samosata. Khurradādhbih 
mentioned that Malaṭiya was ten farsakhs (81 km) from Ḥiṣn Manṣūr. Ibn Shaddād 
says that it was one stage (marḥala) from villages in Byzantine territory. 
History82
 The Hittite and neo-Hittite settlement was at Arslantepe, just east of the city and 
north of the modern city. The town of Malaṭiya was supposedly founded by 
Alexander. Strabo, strangely before the city’s founding, speaks of a specific and 
famous type of wine grown in the region by the Monarites. He also mentions that it 
was the only city in Cappadocia with fruit trees. Malaṭiya was founded (or at least a 
separate settlement) in 71/72 C.E. as a Roman frontier camp. It was granted the status 
of a free city by Trajan in the early second century C.E. During the reorganization of 
Diocletian in 413 C.E., Malaṭiya fell under the under the province of Armenia II as its 
metropolis. In the sixth century, Anastasius and Justinian fortified it with a city wall 
and it was the metropolis of Armenia III. 
 
Lands, 120; Le Strange, Palestine, 499–500; F. Tinnefeld, “Die Stadt Melitene in ihrer späterem 
byzantinischen Epoche (934–1101)” in Acts of the 14th International Congress 1971, Volume 2 
(Bucharest, 1974), 435–43; Honigmann, Ostgrenze des byzantinischen, 57–59, 64–67, 72-3; Canard, 
Histoire de la dynastie, 262–63, 733–36. 

 In the Early Islamic period, the town became a major thughūr city, although 
changing hands periodically. According to Bonner, the city was originally settled in 
the Early Islamic period during the late Umayyad caliphate. When the Arabs arrived, it 
was apparently evacuated by the Byzantines. According to Balādhurī, ‘
Iyād b. Ghanm 
conquered the city under the direction of Ḥabīb b. Maslama al-Fihrī during the reign 
of ‘Umar I and Muslims were settled there from Ṭaranda. When Mu‘
āwiya became 
governor of Syria and the Jazīra, he sent Ḥabīb to Malaṭiya who conquered it by force 
in 653–654 and established there a cavalry. During the reign of ‘Abd al-Malik, the 
Byzantines marched against the city, destroyed it, and abandoned it. Hishām 
reconstructed the city and camped near it during this time. In 754 (or 750, since this is 
the date of Constantine V’s invasion and timed with the ‘Abbāsid revolution) 
Constantine V (Copronymos) conquered the town and the submitted it to treaty, letting 
its people leave. He then destroyed the city walls and disbanded its garrison, not 
establishing a new one. Even though the city had the help of the thughūr site of 
Kamkh under the Sulaym (the rest of the Jazīra was occupied in a rebellion under the 
governor of Ḥarrān, Musa b. Ka’b), the city fell. 
 As mentioned by Balādhurī, al-Manṣūr in 756/57 to 757/58 ordered al-Ḥassān b. 
Qaḥṭaba to rebuild Malaṭiya and construct a mosque and city wall, which was done 
under the direction of ‘
Abd al-Wahhāb b. Ibrāhīm b. Muḥammad, governor of the 
Jazīra. Al-Ḥassān camped outside the city for six months with his army while this was 
done. This time volunteers from Syria and Jazīra assisted in the rebuilding and he 
settled a garrison of 4,000 soldiers. Ibn Shaddād from Ya‘
qūbī states that the city was 

divided into seven quarters, one per tribe (such as Sulaym, Qays, etc.), which was also 
the basis for military organization. The troops were organized into ‘irāfas of ten to 
fifteen men. Barracks consisted of two rooms on the ground floor and two rooms on 
an upper floor with an attached stable and land to cultivate food. Ibn al-‘Adīm (d. 
1262) provides a description of the quarters for troops, the numbers of troops, and 
their stipends. Khalīfa (640) states that Ja‘far b. Hanzala al-Bahranī and ‘Abd al-Wahid rebuilt the city and planted seeds and baked lime. Following these activities, 
there was an expedition in to Byzantine territory. In 837, Emperor Theophilus took 
Malaṭiya (along with Zibaṭra) and killed men and took women and children, according 
to Ibn al-‘Ibrī, a Christian historian from Malaṭiya. In 866, Malaṭiya and Sumaysāṭ
were attacked by the Byzantines, but the Malaṭiyans successfully defended their city. 
From 818/845 onward there was a continuous line of bishops or metropolitans as well 
as a number of undatable bishops dating between the seventh and early ninth 
centuries. 
 In 925/26, the Byzantine emperor ordered the inhabitants of the thughūr to pay him 
the kharāj tax or he would invade. They refused and he attacked the country and 
destroyed Malaṭiya in 926/27. He took prisoners, pillaged the town and stayed there 
for twenty-six days before leaving. The citizens of Malaṭiya implored Baghdād for 
help but received none. In 931, Mleh (Malīḥ) the Armenian marched against the city 
with an army. The citizens offered peace and gave him the keys to the city. He was 
ousted by Sa‘
īd b. Ḥamdān, uncle of Sayf al-Dawla. Malaṭiya was destroyed again in 
934 by John Kourkouas with an army of 50,000 during the beginning of the Byzantine 

reconquest. The city was taken after a long siege and food embargo. He took the town 
by treaty on the 19 May 934. Syrian Christians were persuaded to live there after this 
point. Its circuit walls dismantled and not rebuilt until later in the eleventh century. 
According to C. Holmes, notables of the city lobbied for their repair to prevent further 
raids by Turkish nomads and Armenian brigands.83 Several Jacobite monasteries 
sprang up around the city including Goubbos on the Euphrates in 957/58 and Tela 
Qastra to the east of Malaṭiya in 986–991. In the tenth century, Istakhrī states that it 
was a large town surrounded by hills where grapes, almonds, and other nut trees and 
crops of both hot and cold regions grew. The city was taken by the Saljūqs under 
Tughril Beg with 3,000 troops in the winter of 1057. Michael the Syrian gives an 
account of this invasion, stating that the Turks camped outside the town on a slope of a 
hill and for ten days slaughtered, tortured, pillaged, and then burned the city and the 
land around it within a day’s march.84 During the Danishmenid, Saljūq, and Mamlūk 
periods, the site was a main seat of governorship and then declined. The city was taken 
in 1257 by the Mongols, though did not destroy it. In the thirteenth century, Yāqūt 
mentions that Malaṭiya was in Byzantine hands, although the date is uncertain. 
Mustawfī in the fourteenth century calls it a “fine town with a strong fortress.” It had 
both pasture lands and grew grain, cotton, and fruit. Nearby on a mountain peak 
(possibly Nemrut Dağ) was a convent called Dayr Barsuma that was sacred to the 
Christians. 
 

Remains 
 The site had a moat and double fortified rectangular wall with polygonal and 
rectangular towers. The long sides were to the east and west. The entrance was to the 
south side. Over the west entrance was a Saljūq building from 1247 that was later 
altered in the fourteenth/fifteenth century. Most of the modern develoment was at the 
northern end. Sinclair ascertained that the present city walls were probably the sixth 
century walls and the outer wall of the double wall. He also credited the rectangular 
city layout to the Romans.85 The eastern side where the river flowed was an exception 
to this. To the west and south were a row of “prow” shaped towers and to the east 
were large rectangular bastions. He supposed these to be eighth/ninth century. The 
twelfth century construction was of small rough blocks. The wall from southwest to 
northwest measures 500 m and from southwest to southeast measures 300 m. Sinclair 
stated that the Great Mosque (number four on his map and dates to 1224, Saljūq) was 
near the middle but slightly southwest and that the major built up area was to the north 
and east. The Christian population lived to the north and consisted of Armenian and 
Syrian Christians. The mosque in the citadel was attributed to the Mamlūk 
governorship. West of the ancient site are two türbeler and a small graveyard. Work 
by Italian teams in the 1960s also continues today but focuses mainly on Arslantepe to 
the south.86
Coordinates: 37N 4252799 E 444661 
 
campagne 1961 e 1962 (Rome, 1964), tav. 69, 71, 73. 

Manbij/Jisr Manbij 
Classical Hierapolis; Syriac Mabbogh 
Location 
 The towns of Manbij and Jisr Manbij are actually two separate towns. Manbij was 
not far from the Euphrates River (1–3 leagues) while Jisr Manbij was a crossing point 
on the Euphrates.87 Sources state that the crossing was done via a bridge of boats. 
History 
 Abū al-Fīda’ writes that the city was founded by the Persian Khosroes and named 
Manbik. In the classical period it was called Bambyce. Balādhurī stated that ‘Iyad b. 
al-Ghanm went to subdue villages of the Euphrates including Manbij and its 
dependents. He gave them similar treaty terms to Ruhā: one dīnār and 2 modii of 
wheat per man. The Ṭayyi’ tribe, who migrated to northern Syria, settled at Manbij 
and at the ḥāḍir of Qinnasrīn. Manbij was the eastern anchor of the al-‘awāṣim
apportioned during Rashīd and was the administrative capital alternating with 
Anṭākiya, although this is unclear. ‘Abd al-Malik b. Ṣaliḥ, an appointee of Rashīd, 
headquartered at Manbij in 791 as did the caliph al-Qāsim. Yāqūt noted the city was 
watered by canals and wells and was walled. Many visitors commented on its fine 
markets. Abū al-Fidā’ also notes that the town was surrounded by mulberry trees for 
cultivating silkworms. Jisr Manbij was identified as the castle Qal‘at al-Najm or Ḥiṣn 
 

Manbij on the Euphrates bank. However, it had a lower town below the walls of a 
castle. The castle was rebuilt by Nūr al-Din according to Abū al-Fidā’. 
Remains 
 The Tabqa Dam Euphrates Survey in 1968 did not locate the town of Jisr Manbij 
and there is confusion between the two sites. 
Coordinates: 37N N 4043273 E 406771 (Manbij) 
Mar‘
ash 
(see Chapter 3) 
Classical Marasion/Marazion, Germanikeia (nearby); Modern KM 5, KM 54, or 
Kahramanmaraş? 
Location 
 Childs wrote that the city lies out of the way and is not on any great road.88
However Honigmann says it lies at a crossroads including the road north from 
Anṭākiya, east from ‘Ayn Zarba, south from Albistan (Abulustain) and Yarpüz, 
southeast from Göksun, and west from Ḥadath, Bahasnā, and Sumaysāṭ.
Childs is correct in that a direct route from the Bahçe Pass (Darb al-‘Ayn) across the 
Amanus should cross the Kahramanmaraş Plain to Pazarcık or Antep rather than go up 
to Kahrahmanmaraş, it might be a similar situation to routes around the Amuq which 
circumscribed the plain probably due to the frequent inundations of the river and the 
 

permanent marsh systems. Sinclair states that the Roman road would have come from 
the Euphrates via the Göksu Bridge into the valley (around Narlı/Pazarcık).90 Haldon 
and Kennedy further Honigmann’s point about Kahramanmaraş serving points north 
and being an anchor for mountain routes. Yet, there are no readily visible passes 
beyond the town; that is to say the town does not deliberately guard a pass. 
Nevertheless, the city was the focus of at least eight routes. The routes into the Taurus 
were all through steep narrow river valleys and not easy to traverse. Given the nature 
of these difficult roads, these routes are complicated to distinguish and have been 
confused with one another and misplaced numerous times.91 Two were to the 
northwest to Kokussos (modern Göksun) through the Eyerbel Pass along the Tekir 
River and the Meryemecil Pass along the Körsolu River.92 The Eyerbel route was used 
by the Byzantine emperors Basil in 877 and Romanus in 1086 to invade the town and 
is the location of the modern road. Two were to the north: the Ceyhan River Pass to 
Arabissos,93 and the Kankarun Pass to Elbistan.94 Two were to the northeast and east: 
to Ḥadath, Zibaṭra, Malaṭiya and the Euphrates via the Erkenez River and the Gölbaşı
 
Conquests, 240–41. 
(Kadirli). 
Valley. Sinclair (Eastern Turkey) notes the ruins of the Kısık Köprü, an Ottoman bridge, showing the 
road paralleled the river gorge and moved back and forth. Childs takes this route which he says is 10 
miles west of Kahramanaraş and slower than a more direct upper route through the mountains, (Across 
Asia Minor).
Gorge Pass route. 

Valley and to Bahasnā, Sumaysāṭ, and Ruhā due east, respectively. For this last route, 
however, there are two main roads listed in the Antonine Itinerary from Geramanicia 
to Edessa (Ruhā): one via Catabana–Nisus–Tharse–Samosata, and the other via Sicos 
Basilisses–Dolicha–Zeugma–Benmaris. This last route shows the southeast road out of 
the plain toward the Euphrates. The connection from Cilicia to the west came from 
two routes farther (south)west: the Haci Pass via Andırın along the Ceyhan River to 
Mar‘ash and the Darb al-‘Ayn from Hārūnīyya (Bahçe Pass) to the southern part of the 
Kahramanmaraş Plain. From Mar‘
ash, Islamic geographers state that it took one day’s 
journey to Hārūnīyya to the west and Ḥadath to the north or northeast. Lastly there 
was the important and undoubtedly well-traversed north–south route from Anṭākiya 
and the Amuq Plain to Mar‘ash. 
History 
 Although, Mar‘
ash comes from a Semitic name for a city appearing in Assyrian texts 
(Markasi, capital of the kingdom of Gurgum), Mar‘
ash has traditionally (and falsely) 
been identified with the classical Germanicia. Germanicia and Mar‘ash were in the 
Euphratensis, part of the province of Commagene. Germanicia was founded by 
Antiochus IV and bore coins of its mint from 38 C.E. That it was a bishopric since the 
Roman period is suggested by the mention that under Diocletian, St. Thomas, Bishop 
of Mar‘
ash, was tortured for practicing Christianity (Shephard). In the Byzantine 
period it was the seat of the episcopacy of Eudoxius and the country of Nestorius. 
Earthquakes were recorded in 342 and 565. 

 However, the city is mainly known in the Early Islamic period. The Byzantines, 
who resisted the Arabs, surrendered the city in 637 and were left unharmed by Khālid 
b. al-Walīd, although it is noted that he destroyed the city and fort. As an Islamic 
settlement, it was considered a military fort since Umayyad times and was known for 
its markets and commercial importance. It was placed in the thughūr al-jazīra as it 
was east of the Amanus and said to be garrisoned by soldiers of the Jazīra, however, 
most of the soldiers came from Qinnasrīn each year, thus confusing its affiliation with 
thughūr al-jazīra. Mu‘
āwiya rebuilt the city and settled a garrison of soldiers there but 
it was abandoned in 683 C.E. Ibn Shaddād mentions that as soon as Yazīd I died in 
683, there was a spate of Byzantine invasions. In 695, the Byzantines evacuated the 
city. In 705 it was rebuilt by ‘
Abbās b. al-Walīd I who brought in people to construct a 
congregational large mosque. The city received yearly troops from Qinnasrīn. 
 During the ‘Abbāsid revolution, Byzantines took advantage of the internal crisis to 
attempt and take the city. The Byzantines recaptured it in 745/46 and agreed to a treaty 
on the condition that the inhabitants of the city leave. After the inhabitants left, the 
Byzantines destroyed the town. According to Balādhurī and Theophanes, the city was 
destroyed by Constantine V Copronymos in 746 C.E. Some sources mention that the 
Byzantines remained there until 770, however, it is also mentioned that in 747, 
Marwān II (b. Muḥammad) left Ḥimṣ (destroying its city wall) and sent an army under 
the command of al-Walīd b. Hishām to rebuild Mar‘
ash. It is mentioned that with this 
army, he regarrisoned it, and erected a castle in the center known as al-Marwanī, 
although this is interpreted as an inner keep by Wheatley and an addition to 

Mu‘
āwiya’s fortification.95 From 670–739, three Jacobite bishops are known to have 
resided there. In 754, the Byzantines invaded the town and destroyed it. In accordance 
with this date, the Byzantine duration at Mar‘ash is mentioned between 754 and 769 
when a garrison was established. Under al-Manṣūr, the city was restored by Ṣāliḥ b. 
‘
Alī in 768 C.E and he encouraged people to settle there. In 769, all of the original 
inhabitants of the city and those in the ‘Amq al-Mar‘ash were deported to Syria and al-Ramla with suspicion that they were possible spies.96 In 778, Byzantines crossing 
from the Darb al-Ḥadath attacked the city with a large force but were defeated by the 
Muslims led by ‘Isa b. ‘Alī. Jacobite Syrian Christians were captured and deported to 
Thrace. 
 Under Hārūn al-Rashīd, the population of the city grew and he built double walls 
and a ditch, a common pattern in Early Islamic fortifications.97 The city was know to 
be, like Ḥadath, in a well-watered region rich in trees and cereal fields with extensive 
grazing on surrounding valley slopes making the town desirable for departing summer 
raids, such as those in 806 and 838. In one of these in 841, Abū Sa‘īd Muḥammad b. 
Yūsuf was driven back and Mar‘ash was taken. From 818 until the twelfth century, 
Michael the Syrian lists bishops for Germanicia and Mar‘ash alternatively, further 
emphasizing the distinct nature of these two towns. Six scholars are known to have 
 
should actually mean that this region came away from Byzantine control into that of Palestine and 
Syria. 
the original fortress of Marwān. Could they be referring to the fort of Hārūnīyya located somewhere one 
march west of Mar‘ash towards ‘Ayn Zarba and built in 799? (“The Arab-Byzantine Frontier,” 108). 

resided in the city including Ḥudhayfa b. Qatāda al-Mar‘ashī who died in 822/23 C.E. 
In 847, an earthquake was recorded. In 877, the Emperor Basil of the Macedonian 
dynasty (867–1057) in a famous march crossed Taurus via Kokussos to Germanicia, 
but was unsuccessful in breaching the walls. Many of the suburbs were plundered, 
however. Around this time, Abū al-‘Abbās, son of al-Muwaffaq and the future al-Mu‘taḍid, went to Mar‘ash and other towns nearby to fight the Ṭūlūnid uprising. In 
882, reinforcements from Mar‘ash helped repel Basil I’s invasion on Malaṭiya. In 904, 
the Byzantines led by Andronicus successfully raided Mar‘ash even though the city 
had support from Maṣṣīṣa and Ṭarsūs. An attack by Mleh the Armenian in 916 
succeeded in taking many prisoners. 
 In 938, the Byzantines took Mar‘ash, as well as Ḥalab. In 949, the Byzantines led 
by John Kurkouas managed to penetrate the city and dismantle it until 952, at the eve 
of the Byzantine reconquest, when Sayf al-Dawla arrived. In 953, Sayf al-Dawla won 
a victory near Mar‘ash, and also near Ḥadath killing or taking many Byzantines 
prisoners. He restored Mar‘ash in 952–953. Bardas Phocas, father of Nicephorus, 
attempted to prevent his restoration but was beaten back. Of this encounter, al-Mutanabbī composed a poem. Sayf al-Dawla ultimately failed and the city was taken 
by the Byzantines led by Nicephorus Phocas in 962 who also took Dulūk and Ra‘bān. 
Under the Byzantines in the mid-tenth century, the city became a theme capital as well 
as Ḥadath and Sumaysāṭ. In the next century four new bishoprics (mainly Jacobite) 
were established in the region of Mar‘ash. The town was raided in 992 by Banjutakin, 
who took booty and prisoners. In 1097, the city was captured by the Crusaders under 

Godfrey de Bouillon and became part of Little Armenia with an Armenian governor, 
Thathoul. It continued as a bishopric, as shown by Dionysus Bar-Salibihi, bishop of 
Mar‘ash and Manbij (Mabbog) and later Amid, who died in 1171. Conflicts occurred 
between the Crusaders, Byzantines (Comnene dynasty, 1057–1261), and the 
Armenians. In 1104 it became part of the County of Edessa and held the following 
year by Tancred of Antioch, then Joscelin of Turbessel, then Richard of Salerno. An 
earthquake in 1114 claimed 40,000 lives of the “very populous” area (according to 
Matthew of Edessa). The Crusaders fought with the Danishmandids and Saljūqs. Rule 
passed to Geoffrey the Monk in 1122 and in 1136 it became part of a separate county 
that also included Kesun and was ruled by Baldwin of Marash and besieged by the 
Danishmandids the next year.98
 In 1149, Qilīj Arslān II (of the Rūm Saljūqs) took the town from the Crusaders and 
fought with the Armenians. Rule passed to Giyath al-Din Kay-Khusraw and in 1152 
(or 1155) Nūr al-Dīn Maḥmūd took it and then gave it to the Armenian Mleh. The 
town remained in his possession and his sons, al-Malik al-Ṣāliḥ and al-Malik al-Nāṣir 
Ṣalāḥ al-Dīn until Kaykhusraw (b. Qilīj Arslān) took it in 1208. He and his sons, 
Ibrāhīm and Nusat al-Dīn al-Ḥassān held it for fifty years. In 1258, the town 
surrendered to the Armenians. There was a large earthquake in 1268. The Mongols 
soon destroyed the area but were then attacked by Baybars I at Mar‘ash in 1271. The 
 
(1996): 35–52. 

population estimate in 1550–1600 (based on tax paying citizens) was 13,000–14,000.99
The city at the turn of the century had roughly 50,000–60,000 people consisting of 
mainly Armenians and Muslims with a Christian quarter. 
Remains 
 Other remains of note are a bridge, mentioned by Sinclair and in Carter’s survey 
over the Ak Su. The bridge is Roman and was rebuilt in the medieval period and was 
part of the Anṭākiya - Mar‘ash route. It is 8 km southwest of Mar‘ash and consists of 
five–six piers with little Roman masonry but rather field stones in the medieval 
rebuilding. According to Sinclair, it was used until World War I. 
Al-Maṣṣīṣa 
Classical Mopsuestia, Mamistra/Malmistra/Manistra, Pahri; Armenian Msis, Mises, 
Mamestia, Mamuestia; Modern Misis, Yakapınar100
Location 
 Al-Maṣṣīṣa is located on the Jayhān River in the eastern lower Cilician Plain 
almost due east of Adhana (described as one stage and elsewhere 32 km) and 72 km 
from Ṭarsūs.101 It sits on a natural limestone ridge at the edge of the low hills of the 
Cebelinur (Jebel Nur/Misis Dağ), which extends into the Cilician Plain. Its strategic 
 
Urban Setting, 1520–1650, (New York: Cambridge University Press, 1984), 303, for general discussion 
see also Faroqhi, “Mar‘ash.” 
341, 381, 385f, 451. 

advantage was that it guarded the major trade routes from Adhana and Ṭarsūs to 
Gaziantep and could control entrance into the plain of Issos through the mountain pass 
in Misis Dağ, and the Darb al-‘Ayn (Bahçe) through the Amanus between Hārūnīyya 
and Mar‘ash. It also guarded the entrance into the Cilician Plain from Anṭākiya via the 
Belen Pass. In addition it functioned as a port as the Jayhān River in antiquity was 
navigable as far as Kum Kalesi. Cargo vessels could only travel as far as Maṣṣīṣa, 
however. In the medieval period, trade from the Black Sea to the Mediterranean port 
of Ayās also traveled trough Maṣṣīṣa. The settlement was comprised of two towns 
divided by the river: Maṣṣīṣa on the west bank and Kafarbayyā on the east. The 
modern village of Yakpınar on the west bank and Misis on the east bank occupy the 
ancient site. The east bank settlement was also recently referred to as Hārūnīyya. 
History102
 Seton-Williams provides information about the earliest occupation from her 
survey.103 Beneath the Roman level, she noted a thick later of Iron Age pottery and 
even further below, a layer of Hittite pottery. The site was associated with the ancient 
name Zizi or Sizu. The classical city of Mopsuestia was originally a Seleucid 
foundation known as Seleucia on the Pyramus. It received its Hellenistic cognomen 
from the Greek seer and alleged founder of the city Mopsus, brother of Amphilochos. 
 
Lands, 130–31, Le Strange, Palestine, 62, 63, 78, 82, 105; E. Honigmann, “Maṣṣīṣa” EI1, 521;
Heberdey and Wilhelm, “Reisen in Kilikien,” 11–13; K. Otto-Dorn, “Islamische Denkmäler Kilikiens,” 
Jahurbuch für kleinasiatische Forschung 2.2 (1952): 117f.; A. Grohmann, “Die arabischen Inschriften 
der Keramiken aus Misis,” Istanbuler Mitteilungen 15 (1965): 243–63; Hild and Hellenkemper, 
Kilikien und Isaurien, 259, 351–359.

The coins of the city depict the “Hearth of Mopsus” showing the seer and a flaming 
altar. The city is mentioned in Strabo, Cicero, Appian, and Pliny. The city was also 
called for a time Decia and Hadriana in the second century C.E. after Hadrian passed 
through and Antoninopolis in 215. In the Byzantine period the city is known from 
early church clergy who considered the city as the second most important in the 
province of Cilicia Pedias and part of the province of Cilicia II. John Chrysostom 
frequently preached there and the Bishop Theodorus resided there until 428. Justinian 
I, in 550, convened a synod in the great hall of the city and rebuilt the bridge which 
was probably originally built by Severus. By the early seventh century, the city was 
abandoned, unlike Adhana and Ṭarsūs, under Heraclius’ withdrawal from the region, 
and left only with scattered population of Byzantines. 
 According to Abu Ezzah and Wheatley,104 during the Early Islamic period, 
Maṣṣīṣa, partly due to its geographical and strategic location, was the first of the 
frontier settlements to be colonized during the reign of ‘Abd al-Malik. This is 
probably incorrect as Mu‘āwiya found the city abandoned and destroyed the fort in 
651 and it could be inferred that he established some settlement, temporary or 
otherwise, at the site. Maṣṣīṣa was retaken by Constantine IV from 684 until 703. 
Then ‘Abdalla b. ‘Abd al-Malik and his forces repelled the Byzantines and rebuilt the 
city under the caliphate of ‘Abd al-Malik. It was refortified with a circuit wall on the 
original city wall foundations and a masjid al-jami‘ by 703 by ‘Abdalla b. ‘Abd al-Malik. The mosque was erected on the summit of a hill where the fort was. The church 
 

enclosed within the fortified city was transformed into a granary. Furthermore, a 
permanent garrison was installed. Al-Walīd b. ‘
Abd al-Malik resettled 4,000 male and 
female water buffaloes to deal with the menace of lions between Maṣṣīṣa and 
Anṭākiya. During the caliphate of ‘Umar II (717–720) a second mosque was erected 
within a new extramural suburban settlement (rabaḍ) on the opposite bank of the river 
named Kafarbayyā. In addition, he built a great cistern with his name inscribed upon 
it. Sources say that the last Umayyad caliph, Marwān II (744–750), established a third 
quarter east of the Jayhān River named al-Khusūs, and populated it with relocated 
Persians, Slavs, and Christians. It was surrounded by a wall and ditch and had wooden 
gate doors. However, there is also mention that Hishām b. ‘Abd al-Malik ordered the 
construction and fortification of a fort at Khusūs. Al-Azdī also mentioned the 
construction of a suburb, although this might be the same place. Just before Marwān 
II’s reign in 743, a bridge was built nine miles from Maṣṣīṣa on the route to Adhana 
called Jisr al-Walīd after Walīd b. Yazīd b. ‘Abd al-Malik. In 747, Constantine V 
reportedly repeatedly attacked and destroyed Maṣṣīṣa. 
 Abū al-‘Abbās, the first of the ‘Abbāsid caliphs, supplied 400 troops to the town. 
The next major work on the town was under the caliphate of al-Manṣūr in 756/57.105
He rebuilt the city after an earthquake caused extensive damage in 755. The 
earthquake apparently left the city in ruins and the surviving population living outside 
the city walls, which had also crumbled. Balādhurī states that al-Manṣūr rebuilt the 
city walls and repopulated the city with more than 8,000 settlers from Syria and Persia 
 
 

in 757, and called the city al-Ma‘
mūriya.106 The permanent garrison reached 2,000 
soldiers. The masjid al-jami‘ was built over the ancient temple under the direction of 
Ṣāliḥ b. ‘Alī. It was three times larger than the Mosque of ‘Umar II. Following the 
restorations during al-Manṣūr’s reign through until al-Ma’mūn the city became a 
prosperous and thriving. Hārūn al-Rashīd (786–809) built in the suburb of Kafarbayyā
and fortified the wall. The houses of this suburb resembled khāns. In 804, after another 
earthquake in 803, the Byzantines raided the entire area. Additional earthquakes were 
documented around the region in the ninth century. During this time there was a 
Christian community as attested by an ordained bishop who remained in office from 
circa 793 to 808. In the ninth and tenth centuries, Maṣṣīṣa was also a center for the 
iconoclastic Paulicians. Al-Ma’mūn (813–819) further added to the mosque of Manṣūr 
and during his reign, the newer east bank quarter of the city was filled with khans and 
known as a commercial center. A submission to abolish taxes on houses by the people 
of Maṣṣīṣa to al-Ma’mūn is interpreted by Abu Ezzah as demonstrating that the houses 
of the town functioned as khans at this time and that the tax was aimed at private 
houses because the houses were acting as businesses and probably storing 
merchandise and engaged in trade.107 He also ordered the construction of a city wall 
that was not finished before his death. By the reign of al-Mu‘taṣim (833–842), the 
Mosque of ‘Umar II in Kafarbayyā was in ruin and known as masjid al-ḥiṣn. During 
his reign he restored the bridge between Maṣṣīṣa and Adhana erected in 743. Ya‘qūbī
notes that the bridge had three arches. In 877, Ibn Ṭūlūn, as governor of the thughūr,
 

passed through the town on his way to confront the people and amīr of Ṭarsūs. In 899, 
al-Mu‘taḍid visited Maṣṣīṣa and other thughūr towns in order to personally resolve 
local power struggles in Ṭarsūs. In 904, the reinforcements from Maṣṣīṣa aided 
Mar‘ash against a Byzantine raid. 
 By 943, the town comprised two towns, Maṣṣīṣa and Kafarbayyā, spanning either 
side of the Jayhān River and connected by the Roman bridge. It was noted that both 
settlements were well fortified and built on elevated land and that the masjid al-jami‘ 
afforded a view to the sea four leagues away. Although which mosque Istakhrī is 
referring to is unknown it can be assumed to be the western bank that is considerably 
higher in elevation due to the limestone ridge. This indicates that in the mid-tenth 
century the western settlement of Maṣṣīṣa was still considered the major urban core. 
Istakhrī noted that the “people are agreeable, the markets numerous, and the ways 
excellent.” According to Yāqūt, five gates allowed entry through the old city wall and 
dated to the original settlement while a similar wall in Kafarbayyā had four gates and 
was apparently quite strong with markets. He also attributes the naming of Maṣṣīṣa to 
its founder Maṣṣīṣa b. al-Rūm, grandson of Sam (Shem), offering a rewritten 
Islamicized history of the pre-Islamic city. Idrīsī adds there were extensive gardens 
and fields. He also mentions that south of Maṣṣīṣa, downstream of the river was a 
second fortification called Ḥiṣn al-Mulawwan (“the Colored Castle”) near the sea, 
twelve miles away. It should be mentioned that Yāqūt considered Maṣṣīṣa at one point 
as an ‘awāṣim fort, showing the ambiguity of the terms thughūr and ‘awāṣim for the 
frontier. 

 In 961, the cavalry of Maṣṣīṣa aided the people of ‘Ayn Zarba during a Byzantine 
attack. In 963 C.E., Adhana was attacked and its people fled to Maṣṣīṣa. In 963/64, 
John Tzimisces, the domesticus of the east, raided Maṣṣīṣa attempting to remove the 
Islamic garrison but failed. He put sixty holes in the walls of the city. Phocas, in the 
following year, staged a two-month siege but ceased due to insufficient supplies. In 
965, a plague struck the town adding to the lack of food and despair of its citizens. The 
citizens asked for peace, however, Phocas, taking advantage of the weakness of the 
city, took the city. The city gates were removed after the tenth century Byzantine 
reconquest. During its subsequent history between the tenth and thirteenth centuries, 
the city — like so many others in the region — changed hands often from Turk to 
Crusader to Armenian. In Anna Comnena’s time (1109) there were two cities on either 
side of the river, one of which was destroyed. The Byzantines retook it from the 
Armenians in 1136-37. In the thirteenth century it was noted as a “goodly town”, with 
walls flanked by towers, though in poor condition. Wilbrand von Oldenburg noted a 
ruined turreted circuit wall. At this time the site was in the hands of King Layūn (Leo) 
of Armenia (by 1225). 
Research 
 Perhaps the first research done on the city was in 1879 when a hand drawn map of 
the old city on the north/west bank was executed. The map depicts a rectangular city 
plan following the limestone outcrop with city wall and citadel. At the east end, 
foundation fragments of the wall were visible. Ainsworth noted that few medieval 
ruins can be seen at Misis. The castle, to the north, was built of large stones, spolia 

from classical buildings. It stood on an elevation on the eastern side of river. The post-eighteenth century town was concentrated mainly to west side of river, the other side 
being Kaffirbina. Seton-Williams in her Cilician Survey recorded Misis as Site 11 in 
the survey. She noted that the classical city was on both sides of the river, but located 
mainly on the west bank; she saw architectural fragments from buildings lying all 
around. She fnoted extensive robbing and systematic illicit excavation often with 
entire walls removed to a depth of 4–5 m. The Hellenistic/Roman levels were 6 m 
deep in some areas. Presumably this includes the Islamic levels that she does not 
discuss. Over one Roman wall she noted a burnt layer. Sinclair in his survey of eastern 
Turkey does not include Maṣṣīṣa as it is too far west. Edwards did not survey the site 
due to extensive damage and active plundering in 1973, 1974, or 1981.108 The bridge 
of Maṣṣīṣa is the only thing visible today, connecting the old city on the north/west 
bank to the east bank and Ayas road. The bridge was restored by Justinian in the sixth 
century, then by the ‘Abbāsids, then the Ottomans. Ainsworth says the nine-arched 
bridge was ornamented with two cippi, one with an inscription in memory of the 
Sixteenth Legion.109 One of its arches was destroyed in 1832. Limited survey and 
excavation around Maṣṣīṣa are being done by G. Salmeri and A. L. d’Agata (Cilicia 
Survey Project). Though Byzantine and Medieval fortifications were revealed, the 
survey is focusing on the Hellenistic periods and Hellenization of the area.110 
 

Personal Observations, 8/3/04
 The Jayhān cuts deep into the plain at this point, altering the perception of the site 
on a flat plain, yet, this is still the case. Close to the east is the small north–south 
mountain range (Cebelinur) that reaches the coast. The two halves of Maṣṣīṣa are 
evident today by the existence of two villages. The bridge is the same as the original 
Roman bridge in appearance but evidently greatly reconstructed. The foundations are 
still visible. The west bank has a 40–50 foot high limestone plateau or several actually. 
On the side of the slopes are parts of walls using large ashlars and reused columns. 
These seem to be the few remaining antiquities of the site. Much of the top of the 
plateau is covered by a winding village which incorporates cut stones from the site 
into virtually every wall and installation. Additional exploration of the site was not 
possible. Farther upstream from the river is a stone preserved building extending into 
the river. Upon closer inspection it seems like a Medieval or Ottoman mill whose 
ground floor would have been in the river, while the upper floor (still intact) held 
several large grinding mills. In all likelihood, there was probably a nuria-type 
watermill attached to the structure that extended into the fast moving river. On the east 
bank there are two flat rises only slightly above the bank. On the lowest one, just north 
of the bridge are the remains of the western wall of a building of limestone ashlars and 
a large portal arch in what, at first glance, seemed a very classical looking building. 
The portal arch is bordered by an acanthus border and a medallion decorated to each 
side. However, the arch is pointed and not classical. The structure confirms the 
occurrence of settlement on both sides of the river. The rest of the structure is full of 

collapse and several new stores. The site of the Misis Archaeological Museum, south 
of the site on the west bank, was on a rise with a dense scatter of artifacts, stones, and 
tiles around the entire building area. 
Coordinates: 36N N 4093412 E 733600
Al-Muthaqqab 
(see Chapter 4) 
Classical Mutlubakke; Modern Mutallip Höyük 
Location 
 Al-Muthaqqab has never been definitely identified. Historical evidence is fairly 
consistent from source to source, however. The Acta Conciliorum Oecumenicorum 
lists Mutlubakke directly after Hierapolis Castabala, placing it somewhere in the Plain 
of Issos. Balādhurī states that al-Muthaqqab was located in the thughūr. Mas‘ūdī states 
that it was a ḥiṣn and at the foot or “on the slope” of the Jebel Lukkam. Istakhrī says it 
is not listed as a thughūr site but called a small fortress. Ibn Ḥawqal repeats much of 
the same information saying it was close to Kanīsa al-Sawdā’. Idrīsī also noted a 
succession of coastal sites including Bayās (Payas), Tīnāt, Muthaqqab, Maṣṣīṣa River 
(Jayhān), Adhana River (Sayhān), and Ṭarsūs. He said that Tīnāt was eight miles 
away. Yāqūt conflictingly states that it was a fortress on the coast close to Maṣṣīṣa but 
it was named thus because it is located in mountains which were “pierced” with large 
openings. It was also noted near Kanīsa al-Sawdā’. Ibn Shaddād from Ibn al-‘Adīm 
noted that it was at the northern end of the Gulf of Iskandarūna and was a little fortress 
on the seacoast. 

History111
 According to Hellenkemper and Hild, the original name of the site was 
Mutlubakke.112 Tobin states that it is not a Greek or Latin name but maybe earlier. 
“Mutlu” is an Anatolian/Luwian stem muwa meaning strength or vigor. Al-Muthaqqab 
meaning “pierced,” was an Arabic variation on Mutlubakke. The site is also 
documented in 431 C.E., when a bishop Valentinos of Mutlubakke from there went to 
the council at Ephesus. There is disagreement regarding who built the site and when. 
Istakhrī and Ibn Ḥawqal stated that it was built by ‘Umar (II) b. ‘Abd al-‘Aziz (717–
720). Balādhurī stated it was built or repaired by ‘Abd al-‘Aziz b. Ḥassān b. 
Māhawayh al-Anṭākī under orders by Hishām b. ‘Abd al-Malik (724–743). It had a 
mosque, minbar, and a copy of the Qur’ān written by the hand of the caliph ‘Umar II
(also supported by Ibn Ḥawqal). He states that it was inhabited by a noble tribe 
descended from ‘Abd Shams who had ensconced themselves in the fort out of 
monastic piety, renouncing material possessions and subsisting on food charity. 
Balādhurī added a possibly mythic element: that a buried very long human leg was 
found in a ditch dug at the ḥiṣn. During the Middle Islamic period there was a fortress 
and it was a road station. 
Research 
 Interestingly enough, the site was not mentioned in Seton-Williams’ survey of the 
plain. Edwards, following the geographers’ descriptions, guessed that it was possibly 
 
Ainsworth, “Notes upon the Comparative Geography of the Cilician and Syrian Gates,” Journal of the 
Royal Geographic Society 8 (1838): 188. 

the site of Gökvelioğlu, which sits atop the southernmost spur of Cebelinur 
Mountains/Misis Dağ near the small village of Güveloğlu at its base.113 This site is 
735 m high and strategically located along the road between Ayas and Maṣṣīṣa, both 
15 km from the site. He provides no historical evidence about the fortification and 
dates the construction to before the mid-ninth century and states that it is Byzantine. 
The main problem is that the site’s placement is in the uplands, and therefore does not 
follow the coastal placement by the historical geographers. The site was more recently 
surveyed Özgen and Gates,114 Hild and Hellenkemper,115 and Tobin116 who speculate 
that the site was probably the coastal mound of Mutallip Höyük, visited originally by 
Ainsworth. The site is on the coast at the confluence of the Karanlıkkapı and 
Boğazdere streams, 4 km west of Kücük Burnaz in the fenced compound of the Toros 
Gubre ve Kimya fertilizer factory. It is a large and prominently tall mound 18–20 m 
high, ovoid on a north–south axis, and 170 m north–south by 130 m east–west. Its 
steep profile, graduates gently to the south. Early travelers noted walls ringing the 
mound and towers and arches. Özgen and Gates documented Late Roman walls found 
to the west and northwest sides of the mound built of mortar and rubble core with 
basalt facing, and occasional stringcourses of brick. At the south foot of the mound 
was a wall of large basalt blocks, possibly the harbor wall. The pottery ranged from 
the Hellenistic through Medieval period, “including many Islamic period ceramics” 
 
 114 Özgen and Gates, “Report on the Bilkent University,” 390. 

and a sarcophagus from the second-third century C.E. that was transported to a nearby 
village of Sarımazı and placed in the courtyard of the main mosque. Earlier pottery 
was found north of the mound. There is also speculation that it was a port. Tobin117
records a note from Tomaschek that in medieval European naval charts there was a 
site on the Iskenderun Gulf called Montecaybo, Caybo Mons, or Monte Gabo which 
seems to be Arabic in origin and maybe associated with Muthaqqab. The Mopsus 
Survey in 2004 surveyed the site (Site 15). The fenced site measured 2.5 ha: 70 x 65 m 
(0.35 ha) at the top and 150 x 110 m (1.3 ha) at the base with a lower shelf to the south 
150 x 80 m (1.2 ha). Basalt blocks with cement were visible. 
Personal Observations, 07/20/05 
 I attempted to visit the site and saw it from the gate of the Toros Gubre factory but 
was not allowed in. The mound is not on the coast but may have been in antiquity. It is 
quite prominent and high, and not very usual for the pattern of Early Islamic “frontier 
forts.” Andrea de Giorgi and I examined the pottery from the Mopsus Survey. Eight 
baskets of pottery yielded Roman, Late Roman, Early Islamic, and Middle Islamic 
ceramics. 
Coordinates: 36N N 4090149 E 765645 
Qūrus 
Classical Cyrrhus; Modern Shaykh Khuruz 
 

Location 
 The location of Qūrus is in modern Syria, roughly 70 km north of Ḥalab. The early 
geographers Chesney and Ainsworth mistakenly associated Kilis and ancient Ciliza 
with Qūrus. Chesney described the ruins as located sixteen miles northwest by west of 
Kilis and called Kurus by the locals. Ainsworth described the modern town as large 
and bustling with a rich fertile plain “backed by precipitous cliffs of crumbling 
limestone and basalt.”118 Also, he stated it had thirty-two mosques, stone houses, a 
population of 12,000 consisting of mainly Turcomans, Kurds, Armenians, Syro-Greeks, and some Osmanlis, good markets specializing in leather work and dyed red 
and yellow cotton and wool. Around the area, many cotton plantations were cultivated 
and olive trees. It is difficult to assess what town and site Ainsworth is discussing, as it 
is located somewhere in Turkey. Qūrus lay in the ‘Afrīn valley and was bordered by 
the Kurd Dağ mountains. It was located on a smaller of two hills, 540 m high, located 
on the southeastern end of a plateau within and overlooking a valley formed by the 
‘Afrin river and a branch of it, the Saboune-Souyou. 
History 
 Cyrrhus was a fairly important city in the classical periods and possessed one of the 
largest theaters in the region. According to Early Christians, Cyrrhus was founded by 
Jews from the time of Cyrus. It was in the province of Cyrrhestica and had a Christian 
episcopate. Indeed, there were many churches and chapels at Cyrrhus. Justinian 
fortified the city, elevating it to a metropolis with a garrison, building large public 
 

buildings, and an aqueduct. In the sixth and seventh centuries, the city was caught in 
the middle of both Persian incursions and Arab tribes against the Byzantines. From the 
sixth century, the city began to dwindle in importance and size.119 
 Balādhurī (and following him Ibn Shaddād) states that Abū al-‘Ubayda distributed 
his cavalry and subdued all of the province of Qūrus up to Nikabulus (Islahiye) 
between the Amuq and Kahramanmaraş Plains: “Kurus was for Antioch the seat of a 
garrison that kept watch on the enemy. To it came every year a detachment [tah’an: 
1,500–2,000 men who came in spring and returned in winter] from the Antioch army 
to act as garrison. Later, one of the four divisions into which the army of Antioch was 
divided was moved to it; and the periodical detachments were no more sent there.”120
Salmān b. Rabi‘ā al-Bahilī in the army of Abū ‘Ubayda, occupied the fort in Qūrus 
that was named after him, Ḥiṣn Salman. During the ‘Abbāsid period, it was settled 
with a population of Slavs and had a Syriac population and a bishopric. Ibn 
Khurradadhbih listed Qūrus as a fort on the Syrian frontier. Ibn Ḥawqal listed it in the 
frontier of Qinnasrīn, the ‘awāṣim, and the frontier of Anṭākiya. Ibn Shaddād mentions 
the tomb of the biblical figure Uriyā b. Hannān the Hittite that became a ziyara under 
the name Nabī Urī who is still venerated today. Authors such as Yāqūt mentioned the 
classical antiquity of the site. It is mentioned as being on a hill overlooking the ‘Amq. 
A source from Ibn al-Shiḥna via many other sources states that the mosque at Ḥalab 
built by al-Walīd had materials come from the dismantled Church of Cyrrhus, 
 
Archéologiques de Syrie 4–5 (1954–1955): 89–128. 

considered of the wonders of the world. In 905, the Byzantines retook the city, burned 
the mosque, and deported its inhabitants. 
Research 
 The French excavated soundings in the 1950s followed by eight seasons of 
excavation between 1964 and 1980.121 The research has tried to elucidate the Roman 
city and specifically the theater which has been published to the exclusion of the rest 
of the site. In addition, there are the remains of two second-century Roman bridges 
(one over the Afrin and one over the Saboune-Souyou) renovated in the Islamic period 
and in use today, after cement reinforcement. There is also a bridge to the north, 
although not much remains. Straughn visited Qūrus in June 2003 and documented the 
site in his dissertation.122 He noted that there were reused structures whose original 
ashlar walls were in some cases blocked off. These were evident from excavation 
areas on the slope leading up to the citadel in the area of the theater, and corroborate 
the excavations report which states that the lower part of the theater was reoccupied 
sometime during the Islamic period, “in which there was an economical reutilization 
of the space by simply incorporating the tumble into the foundations of structures 
without attempts to resituate them.”123 Straughn pointed out that he could not verify 
the date or provide a more specific period of occupation as the excavators provided no 
trench plans and did not publish the Islamic material culture. The citadel was, 
 

unsurprisingly, the best-preserved area with a scatter of mainly Ayyūbid ceramics that 
were largely absent from the lower town. The Nabī Urī tomb used today for this 
prophet was described by Straughn as a late Roman pyramidal tomb, dated by an 
inscription to 1304/4 and similar to those seen in the Syrian Jebels farther west.124
Straughn posits that the site was: “not a place of significant permanent settlement in 
the early Islamic period, but rather served as a convenient place to station a small 
garrison and a site for periodic visits of larger army units ... and while the town itself 
may not have been as populated in the Islamic period as at its height in late antiquity, 
it was the most logical focal point for the region.”125 
Coordinates: 37N N 4068531 E 317837 
Ra‘bān 
Classical (Syriac) Rhabaine/Arabena; Modern Araban, Altıntaş
Location 
 The site is located in the center of the northernmost of two transverse valleys north 
of Gaziantep. The southern one is the Merzumen Dere Valley with the central village 
of Yavuzeli. The northern valley’s central city is Araban along the Kara Su. Both 
 
located near the southwestern necropolis of the town, which was reoccupied during the Middle Islamic 
period probably at some point after the twelfth century. 

rivers are tributaries of the Euphrates. The site was on the east–west road between 
Sumaysāṭ and Ma‘rash and it was a road junction next to Kaysūm.126 
History 
 Ra‘bān was taken by peace treaty by Abū ‘Ubayda during the Islamic conquests. 
By the early ninth century, it grew considerably. In 812–814 there was a documented 
rebellion. The city had five walls and was the seat of the Syrian Orthodox bishopric. 
Research 
 Survey work continuing the work of P. Meriggi states that there are traces of a 
lower city and circuit walls at Ra‘bān (Site 10). Cumont recorded a Kufic inscription 
at the site.127 Abu Ezzah did not know of the location of the site when he visited the 
region but posited correctly that it is north of Dulūk and Ayntab. 
Personal Observations, 7/24/05 
 The town of Araban is backed to the east by a prominent tell of medium size with a 
flat top. Many buildings were apparent in the section of the eroding tell. The tell may 
be the largest in both the Kara Su and Merzumen Dere Valleys. Pottery is scarce on 
top of the mound but all periods are represented. I found no definite Early Islamic 
pottery, but did find some Raqqa ware of the tenth/eleventh century. A stone, lateral 
Ottoman mosque sits atop the tells that uses spolia from the earlier buildings. The 
mihrab is flanked by Corinthian capitals. It is likely that the Early Islamic town is 
 

below the modern city; development hampered a proper investigation. I did not find 
the traces of the early Islamic town below, but it might be obscured by the modern 
city. This would have involved serious lengthy village interaction which time did not 
allow. 
Coordinates: 37N N 4142864 E 384111 
Sanjah/Bahasnā
Bethesna; Classical Octacuscum/Scasuson; Syriac Bet Hesnā; Crusader Behesdin; 
Modern Besni128
Location 
 The site is a poorly preserved medieval castle lying in a col between two valleys 
and two ravines running west to east. The site is on a small table of rock. The lower 
town is in between the ravines and was unfortified. The Sanjah (classical Singas) 
River runs by the site. Modern Besni is 2 km north of the old town. From the Gölbaşı-Adıyaman road, travel 11 km towards Adıyaman and then make a right at the sign and 
continue for another 14 km. 
History129
 Sanjah is mentioned by Ibn Ḥawqal as part of the ‘awāṣim along with Sumaysāṭ
and Bālis. It is mentioned again in Hudud al-‘Alam (982–83) as part of the thughur. It 
was known that embroideries of Bahasnā, as well as at Dābiq, were in high regard at 
 
21, 458; Le Strange, Lands, 123; Sinclair, Eastern Turkey, 4.79. 

Baghdād. Sanjah known for its beautiful celebrated bridge, the Qantarah Sanjah, built 
in a single arch of large well-dressed ashlar blocks and is considered one of the four 
wonders of the world along with the Church at Edessa, the lighthouse at Pharos, and 
the great mosque of Dimashq. Muqaddasī confuses this with the Vespasian bridge in 
the Nemrut Dağ area. Bahasnā appears only in the tenth century, where it is presumed 
that it replaced Ḥadath. Yāqūt mentioned Bahasnā in the thirteenth century but it did 
not appear on his list of thughūr or ‘awāṣim sites. In the fourteenth century, Abū al-Fidā’ mentioned Bahasnā as part of the thughūr. The site lay west of Ḥiṣn Manṣūr and 
was an impregnable fortification situated on a hilltop with a Friday Mosque and 
markets in the lower town below surrounded by fertile lands. The castle is listed as a 
northern fortification occupied by the Mamlūks. Timur sacked it in 1401 C.E. 
Research 
 At the site are the remains of a medieval citadel and a lower town, studied by 
Sinclair. The citadel is Mamlūk and perhaps earlier and consists of a double wall 
except on the north side which has a natural very steep embankment. One tower is 
Ayyūbid/Mamlūk and is rectangular with three stories and loopholes. Above the 
middle story is an inscription with embossed stones. The curtain wall left of the tower 
is of inferior construction (and perhaps earlier). The old town has various mosques, 
Mamlūk and later. A recent Turkish publication has come out detailing new research 
at the site.130 
 
kent ve yakin çevresinin arkeolojik açidan genel degerlendirmesi (Istanbul: T.C. Besni Belediye 
Baskanlığı, 2006). 

Personal Observations, 9/26/04 
 The site is located in hilly terrain between Ḥadath and Adıyaman and a little south 
towards Gaziantep. There is a stream nearby, as well as an Ottoman mosque and 
bathhouse. To the east of the medieval castle there is a flat area at the base of the hill. 
There were some scattered rubblestones but no substantial masonry or large pottery 
scatters. I did not do an intensive survey of the region below and did not definitely 
find any Early Islamic evidence in a lower city. The site is one of the only thughūr
sites not located in a plain. Interestingly, neither Sanjah nor Bahasnā appeared among 
the lists of Early Islamic thughūr but only appeared in the mid-tenth century, judging 
from sources. It is likely that they were both proximal or the same site or different 
names for the earlier lower town (Sanjah) and later castle (Bahasnā). Although bearing 
different names, the towns and lower town/upland castle may have been a settlement 
that shifted into an upland fortification in the thirteenth century.
Shimshāṭ
Classical Arsamosata; Modern Haraba 
Location 
 Today the site of Shimshāṭ lies underneath the Keban Dam Lake between the 
Malatya and Palu Plains. It was flooded in 1974. The site was located on the Arsana 
River (Nahr Arsanas or present Murat Su) between the Nahr al-Dhib (Wolf 
River/Gunek Su) and Salqit River (Peri Çayı). The river flowed through the city from 
the south and curved around the citadel’s southeast side and turned northeast. The site 
was located between Pālūya (Palu) and Ḥiṣn Ziyād. Sinclair states at the time of his 

visit, that citadel was one km further jutting northeast into the lake while the rest of the 
settlement lay to the southeast as a rectilinear town, but submerged at the time of his 
visit.131 The other villages that may have been part of the original site are visible to the 
south. 
History 
 The site was founded in the late third century B.C.E. and was the only city in the 
Kingdom of Sophene. According to Balādhurī and Theopanes, Ṣāliḥ b. ‘Ali rebuilt 
Shimshāṭ along with Mar‘ash around 768 C.E. In the thirteenth century, Yāqūt writes 
that it was in ruins. 
Research 
 The site of Haraba was excavated in 1969, 1970, and 1973 as part of the Keban 
Dam Project with six trenches mostly on the southeast side of the hill following the 
walls.132 The castle was determined to be Hellenistic, while the lower town was found, 
enclosed with a city wall, and posited by the excavators as medieval and possibly 
Saljūq. The city wall had a semi-circular tower and a city gate facing the Murat River. 
The arrangement of upland Hellenistic site and lowland Middle Islamic site seems 
curiously inverted. Sinclair writes that by the twelfth/thirteenth centuries it split up 
into seven villages which all bore the name Arşimşat, one of which was Haraba, 
implying the location of the ruins. The twelfth/thirteenth century lower city, as well as 
 
116–7. 
plate 7, 35, 38.1, 38.2; 1970, 75–8; 1973, 25–31. 

the castle, remains poorly understood. There is no mention of Early Islamic 
architecture or pottery. 
Sīs (Sīsīya) 
Ancient Sizia; Classical Pindenissus, Flaviopolis, Sision; Modern Kozan 
Location 
 The castle of Sis is perched on a high craggy outcrop at the northern edge of the 
Cilician Plain at the foot of a long range of the Taurus. It is strategically situated at the 
entrance to the Cilician Plain to the south and a Taurus Mountain pass to Feke and 
Kayseri to the north and commands a high position. It is watered by tributary of the 
Jayhān, the Kara Buna Çay that flows through a gap in the Taurus into the plain. 
Ramsay comments that it was the first station from Anazarbos on the road north to 
Kokussos. Ainsworth interestingly states that: 
The selection of the place in succession to Anazarba attested much forethought and 
prudence. The cities of the plain — Tarsus, Adana, and Missis — were all open to 
invasion by an army moving along the high road of the Gates before described. 
Anazarba, removed from this highway, was still a rock on an open plain. The rock 
upon which the castle of Sis stood was, on the contrary, in a defile which presented 
many difficulties to the approach of the many enemies of the early Christians.
133 
In the early twentieth century it was a small village of two hundred houses including 
Turkomans and Armenians. 
 

History134
 Cicero attributes it as the site of Pindenissus that was eventually shortened to Sis, 
an abbreviation of Issos. Later it was renamed as Flavias or Flaviopolis. It appears on 
the Antonine Itinerary as Flaviada, a site eighteen Roman miles from Anazarbos. Sis 
was first seiged by Islamic forces in 704 but repelled by a sudden advance of 
Heraclius. Its inhabitants left the town toward the “Greek mountains” in either 711–
12/712–13 (according to al-Balādhurī, Ibn Shaddād, Ibn al-‘Adīm, and Yāqūt) or 808–
09/809–10 (Balādhurī after al-Wāqidī). Afterwards, the town fell into ruin, but was 
then restored by al-Mutawakkil under the direction of ‘
Alī b. Yaḥyā al-Armanī (d. 
863–64), who commanded the thughūr troops from 851/52 to 862/63, and then 
commanded troops in Armenia and Adharbayjān. Fāris b. Bughā al-Ṣaghīr gave 
money to restore it due to a vow he had made. This was under the reign of al-Mu‘tamid in 873–74 and the restoration was undertaken by the eunuch Makīn. As 
such, Sīs was considered a ninth century stronghold, captured by the ‘Abāssids who 
enlarged it and refortified it. Phocas recaptured it during the Byzantine reconquest. In 
1114, the Mar‘ash earthquake damaged the city. The Armenians made it the capital of 
Armenian Cilicia and Leo I rebuilt it in 1186. It was a capital and residence of Little 
Armenia princes from the twelfth to fourteenth centuries. 
 
la dynastie, 280; Hild and Hellenkemper, Kilikien und Isaurien, 413-6.
 

Research 
 Schlumberger comments that the site is arranged like an amphitheatre on the 
western slopes and at the base of the mountain, rocky and isolated. There are ruins on 
the mountaintop of massive fortifications including walls and towers and the area of 
the Armenian castle is delineated. Ainsworth recorded the castle in detail.135 It was 
built in three parts and each one “on a different peak of rock” similar to the ‘Ayn 
Zarba castle. He also mentioned “bastions, castellated buildings, a keep or dungeon, a 
chapel, cisterns, and a grotto.” In addition, are the remains of a church and large 
monastery dedicated to the Virgin and smaller buildings on lower terraces. 
Personal Observations: 07/20/04 
 The Flaviopolis/Sīs Late Roman/Early Islamic settlement would have also been a 
key market town for the pass traffic. The precise location of the lower town (and 
classical and Early Islamic settlements) is unknown. They are most likely covered by 
the large town of Kozan, however extensive modern development made it difficult to 
search for them. A river flows through the town. The castle is quite precarious and 
well defended with strong walls, not a town. It provides a view of the Cilician Plain to 
the south, as well. At the base of the outcrop are some other buildings probably related 
to the Armenian castle. 
Coordinates: 36N N 4148511 E 748786 
Sumaysāṭ
Classical Samosata; Modern Samsat 
 

Location 
 Sumaysāṭ was in the vilayet of Adıyaman and adjacent to the village of Kilisyan 
Köy. Today it is entirely under the waters of the Atatürk Barajı. From Adıyaman, it 
was 39 km and from Urfa via Bozova it was 38 km. The mound of Samsat was bow 
shaped. The top of the tell was fairly flat and level, save the central east side which 
had a large eroded deep indentation. The steep sloped edges exhibited building walls 
some of which were exposed and eroded. The mound was 250 m long north–south, 
and 150 m east–west. It was also quite tall and steeply sloped, rising 60 m above the 
great gorges on the west bank of the Euphrates River at 500 m a.s.l. It also lay 
between the mouths of the Kahta Çay (classical Nymphaios) to the northeast and 
Göksu (classical Singa) tributaries to the southwest where they emptied into the 
Euphrates. Before the existence of the lake it would have been in a very deep river 
valley of the Euphrates surrounded by higher plateaus of the hills mainly to the west of 
the site. There were also two natural springs to the northeast from the limestone 
outcrops. The site was the largest in the deep Karababa Basin. 
 Sumaysāṭ was not located directly on the frontier and did not guard a Taurus pass. 
Its importance was that it was a crossing point on the Euphrates and controlled the 
trade routes. Like Zeugma, it was a river station on the route east. Sumaysāṭ was, in 
fact, the northernmost point at which the Euphrates was navigable. As such it was the 
“zeugma of Commagena” and listed on the Antonine Itinerary and Theodosian Tables 
with several roads leading to it. It also would have controlled the passage between 
north Syria (from Ruhā) and Anatolia (from Malaṭiya). The Ruhā road went over 

volcanic ridges, cones, and deep valleys and took one day. It connected into Syria 
through Ḥarrān or into Iraq through Nusaybin. Ramsay states that the Malaṭiya road to 
Sumaysāṭ went from Malaṭiya/Melitene through Maisena, Lakotena (Viran 
Şehir/Surghy), and Perre (Adıyaman), before reaching the site.136 All in all it was a 
crossroads for four crossings of trade/military routes over the Taurus, Anti-Taurus, 
Amanus, and Caucasus Mountains. There was no bridge, but Goell suggests that 
passage over the river was done via ferry or pontoon bridge supported by inflated 
animal skins. An L-shaped bridge over the Göksu Bridge, now in ruins, was nearby. 
The modern town, visited by Ainsworth, had 400 houses with a mixed population of 
Armenians, Kurds, Turcomans, and some Ottoman officials. He states that: “Samosata 
lies in a beautiful open valley of the Euphrates, has a delightful climate and a fertile 
soil, with abundance of water and therefore with unlimited resources for a civilized 
people under a good government.”137
History138 
 L. Wheatley-Irving wrote that Sumaysāṭ was the only site in the Karababa Basin 
with pre-Crusader references appearing in Syriac, Greek, and Arabic sources.139
Samosata was initially the capital of Commagene and founded by Antiochus I on the 
Euphrates. The well-known Roman satirist and rhetorician Lucian was born in 
 
Researches, I.271, 284–85. 
265–66.

Samosata in the early second century. In 616, Heraclius crossed the Euphrates and 
passed by Samosata on his way to Germanicia. Athenasius “Gamala,” the Patriarch of 
Antioch in the late sixth/seventh century, was from Samosata. Upon ascending to the 
patriarchate he appointed Severus his brother as bishop of Samosata. Samosata also 
had a large Syriac Monophysite population with bishops from 595–641. The site is 
mentioned in Procopius, Theophylact Simocatta, and Theophanes Confessor. 
 In the Early Islamic period, Le Strange mentions that it was part of the Diyar 
Mudar and in the Jazīra.140 However it was also a major city of the thughūr located on 
the right/north bank of the Euphrates. ‘Iyād b. al-Ghanm, under ‘Umar I, sent Safwān 
b. al-Mu‘aṭṭal and Ḥabīb b. Maslama al-Fihrī to Sumaysāṭ. Balādhurī writes that they 
destroyed many of the villages and forts around the city before the people of the 
Sumaysāṭ surrendered on similar terms to the conquest of Ruhā, as well as those at 
Raqqa and Ḥarrān. Those terms dictated that each man must pay one dīnār and two 
modii of wheat in tribute tax. Ibn Shaddād from Ibn al-‘Adīm adds that the citizens 
had to offer their assistance as guides to lost travelers, repair roads and bridges and to 
counsel the Muslims. However, after the Islamic armies left the city to go to the Sarūj, 
the Sumaysāṭ citizens rebelled, causing ‘Iyad to return and subdue the city. In the 
Early Islamic period, the Bāhilī and Khuzā‘a tribes settled the region around Sumaysāṭ
and Malaṭiya. In 769, Ṣāliḥ b. ‘Alī deported the entire indigenous Greek and Armenian 
population of Sumaysāṭ to Palestine because under the suspicion that they were spies. 
Although the city was not in a specific mountain pass, it was attacked by the 
 

Byzantines at least ten times and it was the site of inter-Islamic conflict on two 
occasions. 
 In the transition to the ‘Abbāsid period, Sumaysāṭ was a center for the ‘Abbāsid 
movement under Abū Ja‘far and ‘Abdalla b. ‘Alī who were competing with Marwān 
II. Isḥāq b. Muslim, a loyalist of Marwān II who had allied in Anṭākiya beseiged 
Sumaysāṭ in 750. During the reign of al-Hadī, ‘Alī b. Sulaymān transferred 2,000 men 
to Ḥadath from Sumaysāṭ. In 813, the defensive walls were repaired. In 866, the 
Byzantines again attacked Sumaysāṭ. Abū al-‘Abbās, son of al-Muwaffaq, and the 
future al-Mu‘taḍid briefly stayed in Sumaysāṭ and then crossed the Euphrates there on 
his way to fight the Ṭūlūnids. In 927, the Byzantines took Sumaysāṭ. This may have 
been the first time the city actually fell and was occupied by the Byzantines, 
attributing much to its defense in relation to the other thughūr towns. The Byzantines 
killed inhabitants, took prisoners and took arms and money. In addition they rang their 
“clock” (nāqūs) in the congregational mosque at the time of prayer. The Islamic troops 
regained the city and chased out the Byzantines. The Byzantines took the city again in 
934 under John Korkouas. Mas‘ūdī in 943 wrote that the qal‘a of Sumaysāṭ was also 
called the Qal‘a al-Ṭīn (“Castle of Clay”), suggesting that perhaps the fort’s 
superstructure was built of mudbrick. Ibn Ḥawqal and Istakhrī in 951 wrote that it was 
a small city built on the Euphrates with irrigated and rain-fed lands. It also had a 
fortress and obtained its drinking water from the river, suggesting that the aqueduct 
may have ceased to work. In 958, the Byzantines took the city again and defeated Sayf 

al-Dawla as part of the reconquest. Muqaddasī in 985 mentions that Sumaysāṭ was 
part of the Qinnasrīn district. 
 Sumaysāṭ had a continuous line of bishops from 737 to the twelfth century and also 
known as one of the centers of the Paulician movement. It had twenty-one bishops and 
metropolitans from 595–936, two of whom served twice. However, from the sixth 
century, Sumaysāṭ was secondary to Manbij. This changed in the late eighth/early 
ninth century, when the seat of Sumaysāṭ attained metropolitan status. In the very late 
eighth century, the Bishop Severus had a conflict with the visiting patriarch. 
According to Wheatley-Irving, this instance indicated that the site: 1) could have 
patriarchal visits on caliphal authority; 2) had a governor; and 3) had villages.141 Other 
chronicles mention an amir of Sumaysāṭ. Ṭabarī mentions a famous ghazi warrior Abū
al-Agharr who was saḥib or master of Sumaysāṭ. After the Byzantine reconquest, five 
new bishoprics were established around Sumaysāṭ. 
 Sumaysāṭ was occupied by Timur-Taş (Timurtāsh), the Artūqid prince of Mardin in 
the twelfth/thirteenth centuries who conquered it from the Byzantines. It remained in 
Artūqid hands until Muẓaffar al-Dīn b. Zayn al-Dīn
 ‘Alī Kūghak (Kücük), ruler of 
Ḥarrān (d. 1232-33) took it. Afterwards, the city was given back and forth as iqṭā‘ to 
several rulers including Ṣāliḥ al-Dīn. Yāqūt in the thirteenth century says that it had a 
castle and Armenian quarter. Abū al-Fidā’ writes that it was on the border with Syria 
west of Qal‘a al-Rūm and north of Ḥiṣn Manṣūr but not far from either. This is 
backwards, which is surprising for Abū al-Fidā’ whose directions are often correct. 
 

The site is north northeast of Qal‘a al-Rūm and southeast of Ḥiṣn Manṣūr. The city 
declined after the 1260s with the Mongol invasions. 
Research 
 Sumaysāṭ is one of the first thughūr sites that received archaeological attention. In 
1964, an initial sounding was conducted. Between July and September 1967, T. Goell 
conducted a larger salvage excavation in response to the construction of the Halfeti 
Dam to the southwest. Goell dug a long trench east to west across the width of the 
mound, just south of the halfway line. It began on the western summit (higher by 10 
m) and joined the east sounding dug in 1964. The foundation walls and rooms of the 
west side were stepped down towards the east and the river. Within the trench, she 
discovered six levels of mound occupation starting with an Assyrian enclosure. The 
last three levels are of importance here and included: Level IV (Late Roman), Level V 
(Early Islamic), and Level VI (Middle Islamic). Suprisingly, Goell’s excavations were 
unusual in that they did not rip out the upper Islamic layers of the site: “Consequently, 
when we began to dig our trial trench in 1964 and uncovered immediately below the 
plateau surface a rich and varied yield of ceramic fragments and artifacts representing 
the Islamic-medival period, we welcomed this opportunity to augment and record so 
much new information concerning its daily life.”142 In the east end of the trench, in the 
top layer (Layer VI), was a twelfth–thirteenth century C.E. governor’s palace. A 4 m 
deep sounding of 12.5 x 10.0 m revealed a “typical Middle East courtyard plan” with a 
paved courtyard and rooms one–two deep on the north, east, and south sides and stairs 
 

to a flat roof. This was surmised by the indication of wooden beams that were 
probably surfaced with stone rolled clay; a technique used until modern times. Goell 
noted, however, that there were no ashes that might have suggested a destruction of 
the building by fire. The construction was of mudbrick atop rubble foundation walls of 
reused stone from the Roman/Byzantine/and Early Islamic periods. Some stones had 
Arabic inscriptions, columns, capitals, and Roman style relief. The stones were 
mortared and leveled with pebble and mud. The rooms had dressed limestone 
thresholds and stone pavements and were used as work and storage rooms and some 
had storage bins while one had an oven. A washroom with pits and drainage canals 
under the rooms and a bathroom suggested a well-conceived sanitary system. In one 
courtyard was a deep stone lined cesspit. The material culture corroborated these 
functions and was primarily domestic including cooking wares, scythes, saws, nails, 
bolts, hinges, doorstops, hooks, iron arrows, scale armor, iron sheeting, and 
horseshoes. The latter combined with the presence of stone mangers suggest stables. 
The military equipment may allude to the Mongol invasion and subsequent defenses in 
the thirteenth century.143 The pottery was initially dated to the twelfth/thirteenth 
century and not beyond leading the excavators to posit that following the Mongol 
invasion, the site was abandoned. 
 In the western trench was material culture indicating kitchens including ovens, 
hearths, and large twelfth/thirteenth century mortaria. The pottery included luster 
wares, turquoise glazed (Raqqa) underglazed painted vessels, glazed molded and 
 

carved relief decorated vessels. There was also polychrome sgraffiato and Byzantine 
and Persian wares. A green celadon glazed jar with a bronze luster overglaze painted 
pattern was thought to be of local manufacture and perhaps Raqqan. The cooking 
wares had glossy (burnished) red slips and were incised with high necks and often one 
vertical handle and a flat base. These were found in situ on the floors, and many in 
Room 24. The ware was a coarse sandy “apricot” and some vessels had painted 
vertical wavy or branch patterns in red or black. Glass was of the inscribed “Syrian” 
types of the fourteenth century and enamel decorated. The ceramics, bones, and small 
finds were stored in the Archaeology Museum in Gaziantep and the metal was brought 
to the Archaeology Museum in Ankara. R. Pinder-Wilson, deputy keeper of the 
Department of Antiquities in the British Museum made the preliminary identification 
of the Islamic finds. A collection of pottery is located at the Harvard Semitic Museum 
and was studied by Redford (1995) who published the Islamic wares from Goell’s 
drawings, notes, and catalogues.144 He concluded that the site, like nearby Gritille, was 
abandoned before the end of the thirteenth century C.E. and associated with the 
Artūqid refortication of the site. 
 Beneath the palace at the east end was Early Islamic and Late Roman pottery from 
a paved floor and stairway comprising Level V. The Early Islamic pottery consisted of 
small and large jars of ninth–tenth century molded buffware, colorsplash wares and 
seventh–ninth century “Umayyad mottle glaze sherds” of large plate forms. In this 
collection was mineral pitch or “Greek fire.” Mellink discusses a lower level with a 
 
S. Redford, “Ayyubid Glass from Samsat, Turkey,” Journal of Glass Studies 36 (1994): 81–91. 

room filled with highly decorated glass fragments.145 Within the room was a pit filled 
with seventh–eighth century painted wares. Sinclair originally perceived a gap 
between the ‘Abbāsid pottery and the Byzantine pottery and hypothesized a period of 
abandonment and regrowth.146 However seventh–eighth century pottery shows a 
continuity matched by the historical sources. Level IV was confined to the east end of 
the strip, near the east edge, and interestingly, was unwalled until twelfth century. It 
consisted of a paved floor of cut stone and a limestone ashlar stairway. Many rooftiles 
and mineral pitch in masses were also found. The dating was to the Late Roman 
period. 
 Excavation since 1978 by University of Ankara was renewed at Sumaysāṭ due to 
potential dam construction. Sumaysāṭ was deemed the largest of the threatened 
Euphrates sites. In 1983, N. Özgüç headed a large team that excavated the mound 
below the Medieval, Roman, Hellenistic levels to reach the Parthian (Commagenian) 
palace remains in area T51/14.147 They first encountered a Late Roman basilica built 
over the central court, as well as, a bathhouse to the east of the palace. The bath had a 
caldarium with tubulae and a praefurnum. Goell also discovered parts of the Late 
Hellenistic/Roman city wall on the southeast edge of the mound. The wall was a 
 
(1966): 280; M.J. Mellink, “Archaeology in Asia Minor” American Journal of Archaeology 88 (1984): 
448. 
Glass Beaker Fragments Found during the Samsat (Samosata) Excavations in Adiyaman,” in Aspects of 
Art and Iconography, Anatolia, and Its Neighbors: Studies in Honor of Nimet Özgüç, edited by M. J. 
Mellink, E. Porada, and T. Özgüc, 461–66 (Ankara: Türk Tarih Kurumu Basimevi, 1993); L. Bulut, 
“Samsat Ortaçağ Sgrafitto ve Champlevé Seramikleri” in Prof. Şerare Yetkin Anısına Çini Yazıları, 
edited by Y. Demiriz, 31–46 (Istanbul, 1996); G. Öney, “Yili Samsat Kazilarinda,” 71–80. 

casement style (double) constructed in the opus reticulatum style and robbed out. To 
the southeast was also the Ruhā gate facing the Euphrates River crossing. A moat at 
the west base of the mound was conjectured. Sinclair writes of the extant walls having 
a northeast–southwest orientation and the Roman walls being 5.5 km long. A newer 
city wall was built in the Islamic period. Sinclair, attempting to attach it to a historical 
event relates it to the mid-tenth century Ḥamdānid occupation or mid-tweflth century 
Artuqid occupation. This wall was built on the Roman wall. An inscription in a tower 
bearing the name of an Artūqid ruler is convincing of the latter date. To the north 
outside the site was the cemetery toward Kilisyan consisting of rock cut tombs. 
Remains of an aqueduct can be seen on the river’s west bank although, as suggested 
by the documentary evidence of Istakhrī, was no longer working by the tenth century. 
Ainsworth says the aqueduct could be traced for ten miles to the Claudius River 
(Kahta Su) and it was this river that supplied the town’s water rather than the 
Euphrates. 
Personal Obvservations, 9/26/05 
 Sumaysāṭ today is, of course, under water. I drove nearby where the site used to be 
near the modern village. To get to where the site was, follow the road to Samsat and 
make a left at the fork. Then one goes past the mosque to the end of the road and turns 
right, drives through the city to the village of Yarımbağ. Then one turns left on a 
gravel road down to the lake down to a picnic site. A restaurant near the lake past 
Adıyaman has a private museum collection of materials from the site. In addition, the 

Adıyaman Museum has Early Islamic ceramics from the excavations including 
‘Abbāsid lusterwares and molded buffwares. 
Tall Jubayr 
Location 
 The site of Tall Jubayr has never been definitively located but historical sources 
mention that it was 20 km from Ṭarsūs.148
History 
 The site was probably an outpost (maslaḥa) of Ṭarsūs. It was named after a Persian 
of Anṭākiya who fought there. 
 
 
Ṭaranda 
Classical Taranta; Syriac Turanda; Armenian Daranda; Modern Darende 
Location 
 Ṭaranda, on the upper Qubāqib River, is three marches from Malaṭiya. The Roman 
road came through the Taurus most likely from Cappadocia and Kayseri through 
Elbistan/Arabissos and went through the site to Malaṭiya. The site’s status was due to 
its strategic location guarding a mountain pass and important trade route. 
 

History149
 Ṭaranda was considered a maslaḥa (outpost) of Malaṭiya. A garrison of about 2,000 
Islamic troops was established there in 702 after Malaṭiya during the summer raids. It 
was soon abandoned in 719 by orders of ‘Umar II.150 The population was relocated to 
Malaṭiya. The citizens were told to leave nothing to the Byzantines. In 872 C.E. it was 
considered one of the strongest of the fortresses of the Paulicians and known as al-Baylaqānī. 
Research 
 Little has been done at the site. On the site was a castle on a 550 x 130 m natural 
limestone platform 100 m above the river with hewn cisterns. When the castle fell out 
of use, it was replaced by about forty houses. 
Personal Observations, 8/19/05 
 Ṭaranda is just west of the modern Darende. One reaches it by driving off the 
Gölbaşı-Malatya road about an hour to the west. The landscape is quite startlingly 
different from the low hills and plains of the rest of the thughūr. Here it is 
mountainous, as these are the southern foothills of the Taurus and close to 
Cappadocia. The site is, however, is in a valley along a strong flowing river. Past the 
town toward the Sonunucu Baba pilgrimage site one begins to see traces of the ancient 
settlement. There are several square Syrian minarets probably dating to the 
 
Places, 407, n. 48; Ramsay, The Historical Geography, 273; Le Strange, Lands, 120. 
Thughūr,” 70). 

thirteenth/fourteenth centuries. There is also an Ottoman market, well preserved. The 
pilgrimage site has several other points of interest including a small fortification called 
Zengibar Castle. On the other side of the river the foothills rise sharply. They are of a 
strange karst limestone deeply weathered and smoothed resembling Cappadocian 
terrain. There is also a limestone platform above the river. I would assume that the 
ancient site is in the vicinity of the “minarets without mosques,” also called Eskişehir. 
A detailed survey through the entire area, which is covered in houses and a new 
upscale and large hotel, was not done. 
Coordinates: 37N N 4270288 E 368271 
Ṭarsūs 
Biblical Ibsus/Tarshish; Egyptian Toursis; Seleucid Antioch on the Cydnus; Classical 
Tarsus/Arsus; Modern Tarsus 
Location 
 Ṭarsūs is located in the center of the western portion of the Cilician Plain. It is 
watered by the Tersus Çay (classical Cydnus, Islamic Nahr al-Baradān or al-Ghadbān) 
that originates in the Taurus Mountains north of Ṭarsūs and flows down near the later 
mouth of the Sayhān River. During Ainsworth’s time at the turn of the twentieth 
century, Ṭarsūs was surrounded by forest and swamp and Barker noted a stagnant lake 
around Ṭarsūs.151 This is presumably the Rhegma lacus mentioned by Strabo and 
Stephen Byzantium. Ṭarsūs functioned also as a river port via Mersin (sixteen miles 
 

south on the coast) 152 and had a naval arsenal. Childs recorded a population of 20,000. 
The city had cotton mills and small shops and there was active looting of the older 
buildings for their stone “on account of the flooding of the Cydnus and colluviums.”153
The hot lowland nearly sub tropical climate allowed many fruit orchards including 
citrus turunç, vineyards, corn, sugar, and tobacco. 
History154
 Ṭarsūs has been a settlement since the late Neolithic, although for the classical 
periods the founding of Ṭarsūs is mythic and multivariate. Strabo notes that 
Triptolemus and the men of the Argos who were on the search for Io, founded the city. 
Lucan says Perseus was the founder, while Dio Chrysostom says it was either Perseus 
or Heracles and Marcellinus says it was either Perseus or Sandan. It was known as the 
birthplace of St. Paul (or Saul). The Persians took over the city in 547 B.C.E., as 
recorded by Xenophon during Alexander’s invasion. In the Seleucid period it was 
known as Antioch on Cydnus. In the Early Roman period (ca. 79 C.E.), Ṭarsūs was the 
capital of Cilicia under the new province system. It went through several temporary 
name changes. In 194 C.E., it was named Severiana (after Severus) and then 
Antoninopolis in 215. According to the Edict of Diocletian, Ṭarsūs was known for its 
 
changed to Ṭarsūs when it was taken by the Muslims. The two are separate towns. The anonymous 
Kitāb al-aḥār mentions that the distance from Ṭarsūs to the sea was 24 km. 
Sinclair, too far west to be included); Tobin, Black Cilicia; Wheatley, The Places, 120, 261–63; 
Edwards, Fortifications, 30; Haldon and Kennedy, “The Arab-Byzantine Frontier,” 108; Le Strange, 
Lands, 132; C.E. Bosworth, “Ṭarsūs,” EI2; Hild and Hellenkemper, Kilikien und Isaurien, 428-439. 

linen. The Emperor Julian was supposedly buried in Ṭarsūs in 363. In the fifth century 
it remained the capital of the redefined province of western Cilicia (Cilicia I). In the 
sixth century, after a flooding of the Cydnus River, Justinian built two bridges in the 
vicinity of Adhana and Maṣṣīṣa. 
 Mu‘āwiya conquered the city in 651/52, presumably leaving a population of 
Arabs.155 Ṭarsūs had a metropolitan seat for a bishop in 668. Strangely, despite the 
mention of activity at Ṭarsūs from over a century earlier, Islamic geographers write 
that Ṭarsūs was not mentioned as a thaghr until the caliphate of al-Mahdi. In 779, al-Ḥassān b. Qaḥṭaba, the son of the commander of the Khurāsānī troops and a general, 
came to a supposedly deserted site and established a settlement with a Khurāsānī
legion of three notable sons, eunuchs, horsemen, envoys, 4,000 camels bearing flour. 
He came from Byzantine territory and camped on the plain of Ṭarsūs. He relayed to al-Mahdī that the city was in ruin and suggested rebuilding, estimating that the 
population capacity of the town was 100,000. It was actually neither garrisoned nor 
refortified until the reign of Hārūn al-Rashīd in 786/87 or 787/88 when he brought in 
4,000–5,000 soldiers.156 They were apparently all captured by the Byzantines in 
804/05 and not released until the next year. Responding to a Byzantine threat in 
806/07, al-Rashīd sent his Khurāsānī general Harthama b. ‘Ayan on a summer 
campaign to secure it and refortify the city, populating it, making it a madīna with a 
congregational mosque, and giving its inhabitants plots of land (iqṭā‘). This was 
entrusted to Faragh the eunuch and finished in 810/11. Ibn Ḥawqal mentions that al-
 

Ma’mūn, who died at Badhandūn (Podandos) at the Cilician Gates, was buried at 
Ṭarsūs in 833 on the left hand side of the Friday mosque. Al-Mu‘taṣim was in Ṭarsūs 
when he received his khalīfa. 
 In the late ninth century, Ibn Ṭūlūn, as governor of the thughūr, tried to persuade 
the inhabitants of Ṭarsūs to launch a campaign into Anatolia. He was unsuccessful and 
in 877, Ibn Ṭūlūn tried to beseige Ṭarsūs. The citizens, led by Yazaman (and al-Muwaffaq) rejected him, raising their prices and setting high costs for his large army. 
Ibn Ṭūlūn returned the following winter and camped outside, but the citizens diverted 
the Baradān River to his encampment, forcing him to evacuate. Interestingly, Abū al-
‘Abbās (the future al-Mu‘taḍid), son of al-Muwaffaq went to fight the Ṭūlūnids but 
was not allowed into Ṭarsūs either. It is most interesting to note the presence of a 
garrison of Turkoman troops stationed in 877 by an ‘Abbāsid Turkish bey named 
Urhuz who conducted excursions to Cappadocia. In 900, the Byzantines attacked the 
city. Several local governors vied for power and tried to gain control over the city. The 
internal conflict was resolved by al-Mu‘taḍid who came personally and punished the 
thughūr leaders and the imam of the Ṭarsūs mosque, and burned the entire war fleet of 
Ṭarsūs (fifty ships) and its equipment.157 Over the next two centuries it quickly 
became the largest and perhaps most metropolitan commercial and military city on the 
plain, guarding the road to the heavily frequented Cilician Gates. 
 The most information is known from the tenth century from Abū ‘Amr ‘Uthmān b. 
‘
Abd Allāh al-Ṭarsūsī’s Kitāb siyār al-thughūr only preserved in Ibn al-‘Adīm’s 
 
activities. As such, rebellious forms of opposition such as untaxed and illegal trade probably were 
aggravating al-Mu‘taḍid, as he was not receiving money. 

Bughyat al-Talab fī Tārīkh Ḥalab.
presumed exaggeration. The city was first apportioned into 20,000 pieces each 20 x 20 
dhiras (or 184 cubic meters). The city was enclosed with double walls separated by a 
trench (khandaq) and each wall had five gates. Al-Sarakhsī and Ibn Ḥawqal also 
attests to a double wall of stone and deep ditch but they mention six gates. Al-Sarakhsī
also mentions that the Nahr Baradān traversed the town. The outer gates were plated 
with iron (hadīd mulabbas), while the inner gates were made of solid iron (hadīd 
musmat). The inner wall was pierced with 18,000 loopholes (shurafāt), for crossbows 
capable of being used by 16,000 archers at one time and set with a hundred towers 
(abrāj) at intervals, half of which were used for projectile launching. These also 
included anti-seige devices such as mangonels. 
 Al-Sarakhsī also mentions that the city wall was ancient (pre-Islamic) and that he 
saw the traces of twenty-five other doors that were closed up. Interestingly enough, the 
towers were owned by private individuals and served as living quarters for the 
permanent population (muta’ahhilin) or single warriors (‘uzzab or “bachelors”). One 
tower, adjacent to the zawiya of the rope makers, was also used as paper factory. Other 
housing in the city included many different terms such as dār, ribāṭ, zawiya, or khānqā
and these were used by ghazis and located inside the fort. In 903, 34,000 places in 
2,000 streets and alleys were documented, according to Ibn ‘Atiyya’s report. Two-thirds of the houses were for the ‘uzzab and ghazīs while the rest were for a permanent 
 
Rule in Tarsus (Fourth/Tenth Century)” Graeco-Arabica 5 (1993): 183–96; Bosworth, “The City of 
Tarsus,” 268–86. 

population available through waqf, or private ownership.159 Ibn Ḥawqal states that the 
houses (dār) were for soldiers of each country. Several of these are described which 
must have been very large buildings. One was located at the end of the Street of 
Carpenters, founded by Shaghib, a slave mother of al-Muqtadir. It housed 150 ghulam 
(young slave warriors) along with their blacksmiths, armorers, and other attendents all 
supported by awqāf in the mid-tenth century, and raised one hundred dīnārs per year. 
Another house was sponsored by Qabiha, a slave concubine of al-Muttawakkil (and 
mother of al-Muqtadir) on Bab al-Safsaf Street with 150 ghulam, under command of 
an officer mawālī. Yet another house was occupied by freedmen/freedwomen on the 
Street of Barmakis. There was also a house for eunuchs and senior calvary officers. 
The house of Ibn Qahtabi on River Street was for Sufīs and ascetics. The house in 
Zuhayr b. al-Harith Street was divided with an upper floor for collective domestic 
arrangements and a ground floor for stabling war steeds of leading commanders, 
storerooms, and shops. 
 Waqf revenues from shops were used for horses, fodder, equipment, and caretakers. 
Kennedy posits that the main unit of defense was then not the castle, but the fortified 
city. Half of the regular troops were Khurāsānī and half were Syrian/Jazīran. These 
troops were given higher pay (‘ata’). Stipends were supplemented by small land grants 
(milk) subject to lower rate of tax (‘ushr). Call to arms was often done from the Bāb 
al-Jihād. The supervisor of markets and public morality (al-muhtasib) was in charge of 
recruiting men and youth (and one can surmise cleaning out the city’s available 
manpower). During these calls to fight, Ṭarsūsī states that the all of the gates leading 
 

into and out of the city would be locked and the keys would be entrusted to the police 
chief. Once the Sultan and his troops returned from the expedition (here termed nafīr) 
the gates would be unlocked. For mercantile activities: commodities were brought into 
the city by camel or cart (‘ajal) of which there many in the city. Paper was also 
manufactured in the city and there were ship building industries and weapons 
production. 
 Ibn Ḥawqal in the tenth century contrasts the Early Islamic controlled Ṭarsūs with 
the present Byzantine occupied city. He said of the Early Islamic city that it had a 
garrison of 100,000 cavalry of volunteers from throughout the Muslim world, 
comprising a majority of the garrison by 978. These volunteers were supported by 
powerful and wealthy people who placed property in waqf for support. He wrote that 
of all the cities from Persia to Maghrib: “there is none that does not maintain here in 
Ṭarsūs a hostelry (dār) and a ribat in which to house its warriors for the Faith (ghazī) 
…”160 Ṭarsūs maintained a Christian population. There was a continuous line of 
bishops from 793/817 to the thirteenth century. There were also Byzantines who 
defected such as Andrynicus a patrician commander in charge of the frontier who 
freed 200 Muslim prisoners and moved to reside in Ṭarsūs in 906. In 965, the 
Byzantines led by John Tzimisces took the city under the reign of Niqfūr (Nicephorus 
Phocas) by capitulation. Similar to Early Islamic conquest, some citizens left the city 
and the ones who stayed were forced to pay a tax. However, Yāqūt notes that mosques 
were destroyed. The eleventh century Byzantine historian Miskawayh mentions the 
congregational mosque was destroyed and turned into stables for the Emperor’s 
 

horses. The Turkoman garrison interestingly withdrew from the Byzantine occupied 
city and migrated to the Taurus Mountains. In 1275, the Mamlūks under Qalāwūn 
regained the city by conquest. Several presumably Armenian churches were converted 
to mosques including the St. Peter and St. Sophia. St. Paul, a Crusader church, is the 
Kilisa Jami converted church today. Ainsworth lists six mosques in Ṭarsūs including 
the Oğlu Jami, dating to the fifteenth century, the Kilisi Jami, Makam Jami (tomb of 
the Prophet Daniel), the Yeni Jami, and the Takti-minar. 
Research 
 Currently there are three projects in the city of Ṭarsūs. Gözlü Kule, the tell in the 
city, is being excavated by Bryn Mawr and directed by A. Ozyar. The Cumhuriyet 
Meydanı excavations in the town square which revealed the Roman street are being 
excavated by L. Zoroğlu under the supervision of C. Toskay-Evrin, who is also doing 
work on the Late Roman and Early Islamic cooking wares. In 2005 there was also a 
salvage excavation conducted by the museum and Mersin University of the Roman 
bath that also has Medieval reuse as a ceramic and glass kiln. Ainsworth commented 
that the Eski Hammam dated from the Early Islamic period. 
 Gözlü Kule (or Kuçuk Kalaat) is a low mound to the south of the city that extended 
from the Late Neolithic through to the Islamic periods. B. Barker (British Museum) 
and then Langlois and Mazoillier (Louvre) first excavated the mound. Langlois 
considered the area a pre-Christian cemetery and sent the pottery to the Louvre. Davis 
mentions a castle that was built or repaired by Hārūn al-Rashid whose remains were 

removed.161 Ainsworth noted Roman and Byzantine pottery at the site and called it a 
necropolis. He says that the castle, (whose remains are now gone), is Byzantine with 
Roman foundations and continued until the Crusader period. In addition is a Roman 
gymnasium and stadium to the north. H. Goldmann in 1935 published a volume and 
the chronology extended from the late sixth century B.C.E. to late seventh century 
C.E.162 There was nothing Islamic to note specifically other than a general scatter, 
although the map indicates an “Islamic building” unexcavated to the north. She does 
make note of the probable reuse of classical period building materials in the Islamic 
period, something picked up by Edwards later who briefly noted Islamic recycled 
masonry in the reconstructed city walls. This demonstrates Islamic settlement in the 
same zone as Late Roman/Byzantine, although no specific dates are given for the 
Islamic period. Today it is a fenced wooded park. To the east slope are the remains of 
a theater with only the lower cavea remaining. The Tarsus Museum has ‘Abbāsid and 
Saljūq coins, oil lamps and creamware ‘Abbāsid ceramics from the Gözlü Kule 
collection. 
 S. Keskil excavated Yeşiltepe, Cleopatra’s Hill in 1970.163 It is unclear if this is 
Gözlü Kule or a different place but it is located in the middle of Tarsus between the 
Palace of Justice and the town market. The area measured 70 x 50 m and was 6.50 m 
 
1950, 1956, 1963); see also Day, “The Islamic Finds at Tarsus,” 143–46; G.C. Miles, “Islamic Coins 
from the Tarsus Excavations of 1935–1937,” in The Aegean and the Near East: Studies Presented to 
Hetty Goldman, edited by S. S. Weinberg, 297–312 (New York, 1956). 
(Yisiltepe),” Anatolica 5 (1973–1976): 96–97. 

above the asphalt road. The hill was used as a cemetery but trees were planted on top 
and became a park. Also a watertank for the city was constructed there and earth was 
taken from the slopes of the hill. In addition the town fire alarm was built on top and a 
summer café on its slope, as well as shops built on the north and east slopes. The 
salvage excavation was a result of the many new constructions and looting of 
antiquities. Nineteen meters square were cleared of rubble and a 5 meter square 
sounding dug to a depth of 15.80 m was placed on the south slope. A doorway and 
walls built of poor workmanship of stone and brick with upper parts plastered were 
discovered. North of the doorway, a floor was paved with stone but farther south, the 
floor was covered with a layer of weak mortar about 30 cm higher. A 3.85 x 4.00 m 
room was found at the bottom including an earthenware bowl and six waterpipes 
found in situ. Other vessels, a wellhead, and a deposit of Byzantine and Islamic type 
ceramics were found. Outside the sounding but in the same square were some graves 
near surface. The architecture below revealed red and yellow brick in alternating 
courses. On the eastern slope was the theatre with a lower cavea remaining. ‘Abbāsid 
and Saljūq coins, oil lamps, and Sāmarrān ceramics were found. 
 The Cumhuriyet Meydanı excavations were started in 1993 over an area of 8000 
square meters. It consists primarily of an east–west street with a colonnade and market 
buildings to either side. The road is seven meters wide and paved with basalt with 
limestone bordering and used for the drainage. The extensive sewer and drainage 
system fed into the Regma lagoon south of the city. The excavations went down to 
mainly Roman remains including a podium, columns with Corinthian capitals, and 

several mosaics including one associated with a private house as the later levels have 
been removed. The occupations are under a fairly substantial overburden, which as 
Davis remarked in the turn of the century was at the time fifteen to twenty feet below 
the present level. Cleopatra’s Gate is also still standing and marked the southern gate 
to the city and adjoined the harbor. The locations of other monuments referred to by 
the early twentieth century explorers are unsure. Reference is made to the “Gate of 
Holy War” that survived allegedly and is mentioned by Childs, but was not standing 
during his time. Childs mentions, “In times of peace and truce one thinks the Gate of 
Holy War must have been also the gate of a secular commerce as rich and varied as 
the East could show.”164 The bridge over the Cydnus is Armenian but there is a bridge 
of Justinian east of the city. In the foundations of an Armenian church were found 
coins, jewelry, and a medallion of Constantius. Davis also mentions a fort towards the 
Cydnus and the Demir Kapı gate to the southeast of town and Kandji Kapı to the south 
heading towards Mersin. Of this last gate, Davis posits that the pointed arches are of 
Byzantine work and maybe Justinian, but they could be Islamic, as well. There are 
reparations by Hārūn al-Rashid, Leo II, and Hethoum I. The tomb of the emperor 
Julian and Ma’mūn are nearby. Near the Demir Kapı is the tomb of Sardanopolos built 
in an Asiatic style and classicizing. Nearby Tarsus, is thought to be the cave of the 
seven sleepers, mentioned in the Qur’ān as a sacred site. 
 

Personal Observations, 7/05 
 As previously stated, the Cumhuriyet Meydanı excavations which are in the middle 
of the town, revealed a classical colonnaded street with shops with roughly 2–3 m of 
overburden within which are Medieval remains. However, the museum collection 
includes Early Islamic lamps, intact buffware jugs and juglets, and two nearly 
complete restored holemouth brittleware cooking pots with rocker decoration. Also 
there are many ‘Abbāsid, Faṭimid, Ayyūbid, and Mamlūk coins including a horde of 
‘Abbāsid silver dirhams (called “emevian” on the museum label) on display. At the 
time of the visit, the salvage excavation was being undertaken at the Roman bath in 
the middle of town. I examined their pottery and the fairly well-preserved brick 
structure had a considerable amount of medieval ceramics, both Early and Middle 
Islamic. Within the bath were both a glass and ceramic kiln, similar to the pattern seen 
at Anṭākiya and Kanīsa al-Sawdā’. The mound of Güzlu Küle to the south of the city 
was probably on a navigable river down to the Mediterranean. Nothing really is visible 
except for several sections of pottery to the south. 
 Ç. Toskay-Evrin’s work on the cooking wares from the Cumhuriyet Meydanı
excavations is an important contribution for the knowledge of brittlewares, an often 
neglected ceramic category. She also goes beyond the potsherd and uses its form to 
reflect upon the method of cooking and the diet of those that used them. However, her 
interpretations are problematic for the Early Islamic periods on several levels. First, 
four strata were discerned from the excavations, with the fourth ending in the mid-seventh century with the Islamic conquests. However, she states (mainly using 

Hellenkemper and Hild’s work) that although the city was abandoned following the 
Islamic conquests, it was rebuilt in the ‘Abbāsid period.165 Second, she dates the most 
ubiquitous example of an ‘Abbāsid cooking pot, the holemouth brittleware with rocker 
decoration (her Type 4), to the end of the Late Roman period. Admittedly, she states 
that the final two strata were often confused with many rebuildings and later pits 
consisting of unsealed contexts and therefore difficult to differentiate. Regarding the 
appearance of this ware in the second strata, a Roman level, she states: “for especially 
the pits dug by later occupiers in Area 7 clearly demonstrate that this type does not 
belong to Phase 2, but to a later stage. Its existence in 5L Area 7 may be the result of 
contamination.”166 However, she overlooks the many parallels of this ware all over 
North Syria, the Jazīra, and even farther south: “Neither Type 4 nor Type 4a could be 
paralleled in Cilician or other sites”167 that have dated this ware between the eighth 
and tenth centuries (see Appendix 1). Third, she states that there were numerous 
‘Abbāsid coins, but this is nowhere mentioned in association with the excavated levels 
or pottery.168 In the effort of establishing a seriation of cooking pots, there is a real 
 
 165 Ç. Toskay Evrin, “Tarsus Republic Square Late Roman Cooking Wares — 2001” (MA Thesis, 
Bilkent University, 2002), 21, 49, 50 n. 9. 
taken as a tentative upper limit with respect to the material finds used in this study it is certain that 
some cooking ware forms survived well into later periods in other settlements (i.e. Anemurium). 
Therefore some ceramic forms can be assigned to later periods considering the durability of these forms 
and the reluctant attitudes of change.” 
argues that these pots with their rounded bases sat either on tripods or directly on coals and were most 
likely for the cooking of stews or soups and boiling meat. That they were heavy with thick walls near 
the base meant that food was less likely to burn and the ribbing along the walls distributed the heat 
evenly (pp. 91–92). 

disconnect between the archaeological and historical analysis. The interpretations limit 
insight into Early Islamic Ṭarsūs. The Type 4 ‘Abbāsid holemouth cooking pot and 
later types constituted nearly 30% of the entire assemblage. Several examples were 
completely intact, as seen on display at the Tarsus Museum. The Cumhuriyet Meydanı
excavations likely reveal a transformed classical street with shops into an Islamic suq. 
Coordinates: 36N N 408631 E 668364 (Gözlü Küle) 
Tīzīn 
History 
 The site was part of the ‘awāṣim and known from Umayyad times. It was likely in 
a plain known as the ‘Amq al-Tīzīn, where Maslama, the brother of al-Walīd, 
relocated the Amanus Mountain Jarājima to settle in 708. 
Zibaṭra 
Classical Sozopetra/Zapetra; Modern Doğanşehir 
Location 
 Islamic geographers write that Zibaṭra was in a plain surrounded by mountains. It 
was the same distance (one day’s travel) from Ḥadath to the north as Mar‘ash was to 
the south or southwest and two marches south of Malaṭiya, and the same distance to 
Ḥiṣn Manṣūr. Le Strange and Wheatley (following him, presumably) identifies the 
ruins with Viran Shahr (Viranşehir) south of Malatya.169 The town today is 
 

Doğanşehir. The site is located on the Nahr Qarāqīs, a tributary of the Qubāqib 
(modern Sultan Su). 
History170
 The city was founded by the Emperor Caracalla and rebuilt by Constantius in the 
mid-fourth century. Sinclair mentions (although referring to a different site) that it was 
the seat of the dux of the province of Mesopotamia until 527 and then alternated with 
Dara. There is mention that the Byzantines destroyed the site twice in the 740s–750s. 
al-Balkhī states that it was the closest fortress to the Byzantine territory. Balādhurī and 
Istakhrī mention that it was a great fortress from Byzantine times and was located on 
the Byzantine frontier, while Yāqūt and others confuse Zibaṭra with Ḥadath. Balādhurī
further states that it was taken at the same time as Ḥadath. It was also demolished by 
the Byzantines during the caliphate of Walīd II (742–743). The Byzantines seiged 
Zibaṭra again during the ‘Abbāsid revolution. Around 757, al-Manṣūr rebuilt Zibaṭra. 
It was subsequently destroyed by the Byzantines. Hārūn al-Rashīd rebuilt it under the 
direction of Muḥammad b. Ibrāhīm. During al-Ma’mun’s reign, the Greeks attacked 
Zibaṭra and destroyed its fortress. It was rebuilt immediately inferring that the attack 
took place after the end of the third fitna in 814. In 837, Emperor Theophilus took 
Zibaṭra (and Malaṭiya) and killed men and took women and children. The attack 
angered al-Mu‘
taṣim who undertook his famous campaign that reached ‘Ammūrīya 
(Amorium), destroying and seiging fortresses along the way and killing its inhabitants. 
 
Arabes, II.230; Canard, Histoire de la dynastie, 267. 

Presumably after this, al-Mu‘taṣim recaptured Zibaṭra on his expedition to ‘Ammūrīya 
and had four forts built at the site, which were destroyed by the Byzantines. Ibn al-
‘Adīm and Ibn Shaddād mention a mine where iron ore was extracted and exported to 
other towns. Between 793/817 and 958/969 there were ten bishops. In 1315, Abū al-Fidā’, hunting nearby in an oak forest, writes that the fortress was a ruin. The old wall 
lines were barely traced and in fields. 
Research 
 There are two mentions of Zibaṭra in Sinclair and it is unclear if he is discussing the 
same site. For the first site in Volume 3, he states that the only detailed description is 
from a visit to the site in 1840. The site was rectangular with a thick double wall with 
towers except to the south. The 1840 description noted a mounded center with a 
vaulted building. The site today is covered in houses.171 The second reference to a 
Zibaṭra/Sozopetra is in Volume 4,172 where he refers to the site as a miṣr 90 km from 
Urfa. The second site is described as an important classical city that continued until 
the thirteenth century and whose city walls and ruins continued and were incorporated 
into modern structures. This city was 800 m x 800 m with a citadel to the southeast on 
a mound, rounded towers on the walls, four gates, and a necropolis to the north of the 
former town. West of the town was a church, with two of eight large inner piers and 
part of a rim supporting the dome and ambulatory are still standing. The church was 
converted into a fort in the late nineteenth century. 
 

Personal Observations, 8/19/2005 
 Sinclair’s first site is the Early Islamic thughūr of Zibaṭra, located in the town of 
Doğanşehir. He is mistaken, however, in that although the location and physical 
description match, the historical evidence for the second site corresponds to the thaghr 
of Zibaṭra. The site is reached via the Gölbaşı–Malatya road and turning off towards 
the west. From the center of the town, the main road makes a T intersection. At this 
point, one makes a right, goes past the mosque that is on the right side, and then turns 
down the second left street past the mosque. The city walls are quite apparent and near 
the river. They are in fact very reminiscent of the walls of Ḥadath and Malaṭiya. They 
are largely intact and have no facing however one can make out corners, potential 
gates and towers. The walls follow both sides of the modern road and suggest a double 
city wall. Small houses are built over the site itself and in many cases over the earlier 
walls. The Dere Su flowed on the east side and is extremely lush and has a mill. No 
pottery was discerned on the ground however I only walked on the modern roads 
(which are kept quite clean and are cobblestone) and not in houses or gardens. The site 
itself is located in a small valley that extends from the Gölbaşı and Malatya Valleys. It 
is surrounded by mountains. The ancient city is known by the locals simply as the 
“Kale”. 
Coordinates: 37N N 4216642 E 402006
